Acorus calamus: a bio-reserve of medicinal values.

Khwairakpam AD(1), Damayenti YD(1), Deka A(1), Monisha J(1), Roy NK(1), 
Padmavathi G(1), Kunnumakkara AB(2).

Author information:
(1)Cancer Biology Laboratory and DBT-AIST International Laboratory for Advanced 
Biomedicine (DAILAB), Department of Biosciences and Bioengineering, Indian 
Institute of Technology Guwahati, Guwahati, Assam-781039, India.
(2)Cancer Biology Laboratory and DBT-AIST International Laboratory for Advanced 
Biomedicine (DAILAB), Department of Biosciences and Bioengineering, Indian 
Institute of Technology Guwahati, Guwahati, Assam-781039, India, Phone: +91 361 
258 2231 (office), +91 789 600 5326 (mobile), Fax: +91 361 258 2249 (office), 
E-mail: kunnumakkara@iitg.ernet.in.

Many plants are found to possess reliable pharmacological properties and have 
started to attract the attention of researchers. One such holistic plant is 
Acorus calamus, commonly known as sweet flag, belonging to the rhizomatous 
family Acoraceae. The different parts of this plant, such as the leaves and 
rhizomes, are used traditionally in different medicinal preparations for the 
treatment of various ailments including arthritis, neuralgia, diarrhoea, 
dyspepsia, kidney and liver troubles, eczema, sinusitis, asthma, fevers, 
bronchitis, hair loss, and other disorders. Many reports have also appeared in 
mainstream scientific journals confirming its nutritional and medicinal 
properties. Biochemical analysis of the plant has revealed a large number of 
secondary metabolites that may be responsible for its rich medicinal properties. 
Basic scientific research has uncovered the mechanisms by which itexerts its 
therapeutic effects. Medicinal herbs such as A. calamus are quite promising in 
the recent therapeutic scenario, with a large number of people favouring 
remedies and health approaches that are free from the side effects often 
associated with synthetic chemicals. In this review, we try to summarise the 
ethno-medicinal uses, botanical descriptions, phytochemical constituents, and 
biological activity of the plant parts, as well as the molecular targets of A. 
calamus, which we hope will serve as a good base for further work on this plant.
