
The enriched fraction of Elephantopus scaber Triggers apoptosis and inhibits 
multi-drug resistance transporters in human epithelial cancer cells.

Beeran AA(1), Maliyakkal N(1), Rao CM(1), Udupa N(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Manipal College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Manipal University, Manipal, Karnataka, India.
(2)Department of Pharmacy Management, Manipal College of Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, Manipal University, Manipal, Karnataka, India.

BACKGROUND: Medicinal plants have played an important role in the development of 
clinically useful anticancer agents. Elephantopus scaber (Asteraceae) (ES) is 
widely used in Indian traditional system of medicine for the treatment of 
various ailments including cancer.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate anticancer effects of ES in human epithelial cancer 
cells.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Cytotoxicity of ethanolic extract of ES (ES-ET) and its 
fractions, such as ES Petroleum ether fraction (ES-PET), ES Dichloromethane 
fraction (ES DCM), n Butyl alcohol fraction (ES-BT), and ES-Rest (ES-R) were 
assessed in human epithelial cancer cell lines using sulforhodamine B (SRB) 
assay. Acridine orange/ethidium bromide assay and Hoechst 33342 assays were used 
to gauge induction of apoptosis. Cell cycle analysis and micronuclei assay were 
used to assess cell cycle specific pharmacological effects and drug induced 
genotoxicty. Further, the ability of ES to inhibit multi drug resistant (MDR) 
transporters (ABC-B1 and ABC-G2) was determined by Rhodamine (Rho) and 
Mitoxantrone (MXR) efflux assays.
RESULTS: The enriched fraction of ES (ES DCM) possessed dose-dependent potent 
cytotoxicity in human epithelial cancer cells. Further, treatment of cancer 
cells (HeLa, A549, MCF-7, and Caco-2) with ES DCM showed hall mark properties of 
apoptosis (membrane blebbing, nuclear condensation etc.). Similarly, ES DCM 
caused enhanced sub G0 content and micronuclei formation indicating the 
induction of apoptosis and drug induced genotoxicity in cancer cells, 
respectively. Interestingly, ES DCM inhibited MDR transporters (ABC B1 and ABC 
G2) in cancer cells.
CONCLUSION: The enriched fraction of ES imparted cytotoxic effects, triggered 
apoptosis, induced genotoxicity, and inhibited MDR transporters in human 
epithelial cancer cells. Thus, ES appears to be potential anticancer agent.