Colloidal Vesicular System of Inositol Hexaphosphate to Counteract DMBA Induced 
Dysregulation of Markers Pertaining to Cellular Proliferation/Differentiation 
and Inflammation of Epidermal Layer in Mouse Model.

Arya M(1), Tiwari P(2), Tripathi CB(1), Parashar P(1), Singh M(1), Sinha P(3), 
Yadav NP(3), Kaithwas G(1), Gupta KP(2), Saraf SA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar University 
, Vidya Vihar, Raebareli Road, Lucknow-226025, U.P., India.
(2)Environmental Carcinogenesis Division, CSIR-Indian Institute of Toxicology 
Research , Post Box No. 80, Mahatma Gandhi Marg, Lucknow-226001, U.P., India.
(3)CSIR-Central Institute of Medicinal and Aromatic Plants , PO CIMAP, 
Lucknow-226015, U. P., India.

Cancer is a global health problem and chemoprevention is a promising approach 
for reducing cancer burden. Inositol hexaphosphate (IP6), a natural bioactive 
constituent of cereals, legumes, etc., has momentous potential as an 
antiangiogenic agent, that specifically affects malignant cells. The shortcoming 
is its quick absorption on oral/topical administration. Niosomes are flexible 
carriers for topical drug delivery. The central venture of current research was 
to optimize and characterize niosomal delivery system of IP6 for treatment of 
skin cancer. Thin film hydration method was utilized to prepare IP6 niosomes, 
and these were dispersed as a suspension in a suitable base. Developed 
formulations were analyzed for various physicochemical and pharmacological 
parameters such as particle size, encapsulation efficiency, morphology, drug 
release, texture analysis, irritability, cell line studies, Western blotting, 
RT-PCR, and histopathology. IP6 niosomal suspension and IP6 in acetone displayed 
IC50 value at the concentration of 0.96 mM (0.63 mg/mL) and 1.39 mM (0.92 
mg/mL), respectively. IP6 niosomal suspension showed significantly higher (p < 
0.05) activity and showed cytotoxic effect in SK-MEL-2 cancer cell line. Crucial 
events of cellular proliferation and differentiation, like expression of 
ornithine decarboxylase (ODC), proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA), 
cycloxygenase-2 (COX-2) and Cyclin D1 were initiated from the fourth hour 
through application of 7,12-dimethylbenzanthracene (DMBA) on albino mice. The 
DMBA altered expression of aforesaid enzymes was significantly (P < 0.001) 
prevented by concomitant application of niosomal formulations. Results of cell 
line study, Western blotting, RT-PCR, and histopathology suggested that IP6 
niosomal suspension could constitute a promising approach for prevention of 
cellular proliferation as well as DMBA induced dysregulation of cellular 
proliferation/differentiation and inflammation.
