What Has Come out from Phytomedicines and Herbal Edibles for the Treatment of 
Cancer?

Bonam SR(1)(2)(3), Wu YS(4), Tunki L(2), Chellian R(4), Halmuthur MSK(2)(3), 
Muller S(1)(5), Pandy V(4)(6).

Author information:
(1)UMR 7242 CNRS, Biotechnology and Cell Signaling, University of Strasbourg, 
Laboratory of Excellence Medalis, Illkirch, 67400, France.
(2)Vaccine Immunology Laboratory, Natural Product Chemistry Division, CSIR - 
Indian Institute of Chemical Technology (IICT), Hyderabad, 500007, India.
(3)Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research, CSIR - Indian Institute of 
Chemical Technology, Hyderabad, 500007, India.
(4)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya, 50603, 
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
(5)University of Strasbourg Institute for Advanced Study (USIAS), Strasbourg, 
67000, France.
(6)Department of Pharmacology, Chalapathi Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Lam, Guntur, Andhra Pradesh, 522034, India.

Several modern treatment strategies have been adopted to combat cancer with the 
aim of minimizing toxicity. Medicinal plant-based compounds with the potential 
to treat cancer have been widely studied in preclinical research and have 
elicited many innovations in cutting-edge clinical research. In parallel, 
researchers have eagerly tried to decrease the toxicity of current 
chemotherapeutic agents either by combining them with herbals or in using 
herbals alone. The aim of this article is to present an update of medicinal 
plants and their bioactive compounds, or mere changes in the bioactive 
compounds, along with herbal edibles, which display efficacy against diverse 
cancer cells and in anticancer therapy. It describes the basic mechanism(s) of 
action of phytochemicals used either alone or in combination therapy with other 
phytochemicals or herbal edibles. This review also highlights the remarkable 
synergistic effects that arise between certain herbals and chemotherapeutic 
agents used in oncology. The anticancer phytochemicals used in clinical research 
are also described; furthermore, we discuss our own experience related to 
semisynthetic derivatives, which are developed based on phytochemicals. Overall, 
this compilation is intended to facilitate research and development projects on 
phytopharmaceuticals for successful anticancer drug discovery.