Breast cancer amelioration by Butea monosperma in-vitro and in-vivo.

Karia P(1), Patel KV(2), Rathod SSP(3).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Pharmacy, The Maharaja Sayajirao University of Baroda, 
Vadodara 390001, Gujarat, India. Electronic address: prachidk@gmail.com.
(2)Faculty of Pharmacy, The Maharaja Sayajirao University of Baroda, 
Vadodara 390001, Gujarat, India. Electronic address: 
kirti.patel-pharmacy@msubaroda.ac.in.
(3)Visiting Faculty, Parul Institute of Pharmacy and Research, P. O. Limda, Ta. 
Waghodia, Vadodara, Gujarat 391110, India. Electronic address: 
shivrathod_phar@msubaroda.ac.in.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Butea monosperma belonging to family Fabaceae is 
used in the Indian traditional medicine (Ayurveda) for various ailments 
including abdominal tumors and possess anti-estrogenic activity.
AIM OF THE STUDY: The present study is aimed at investigating the 
chemo-preventive potential of Butea monosperma in breast cancer and elucidating 
it's mechanism of action by assessing its effect on key processes like 
apoptosis, angiogenesis and metastasis.
METHODS: Cytotoxic potential of methanol extract of Butea monosperma flower 
(MEBM) was tested in MCF-7 (estrogen receptor positive), MDA-MB-231 (triple 
negative) and MDA-MB-453 (HER2 positive) human breast cancer cells by MTT assay. 
Chemo-preventive potential was evaluated in-vivo in Methylnitrosourea (MNU) 
induced mammary cancer in nulliparous Sprague-Dawley rats. The mechanism for 
anticancer potential was screened by in-vitro studies involving Annexin V- FITC 
assay (apoptosis), Chick Chorioallantoic Membrane assay (angiogenesis) and 
Migration assay (metastasis). Statistical analysis was done by one way and two 
way ANOVA (for Growth Rate and feed consumption efficiency) followed by post hoc 
Bonferroni's test with P value < 0.05.
RESULTS: It is observed that the exposure of MEBM, at various concentrations and 
time intervals to different cell lines, resulted in decreased cell 
proliferation. The IC50 value of MCF-7 cells was found significantly less than 
that of MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-453 cells, which indicated that the extract of 
said medicinal plant were more potent inhibitors of estrogen positive breast 
cancer cells than other types of breast cancer cells in vitro. Corroborative 
evidences were acquired in MNU actuated mammary carcinogenesis where MEBM 
constricted tumor parameters, decreased expression of estrogen and progesterone, 
nucleic acid content and increased latency period. MEBM also induced apoptosis, 
inhibited angiogenesis and metastasis in-vitro.
CONCLUSION: Selective cytotoxic activity in MCF-7 estrogen positive breast 
cancer cells and inhibition of growth of mammary carcinoma in-vivo by methanol 
extract of Butea monosperma flowers (MEBM) suggests chemo-prevention through 
modulation of estrogen and progesterone receptor, apoptotic, anti-angiogenesis 
and anti-metastatic activity.