Herbal drug patenting in India: IP potential.

Sahoo N(1), Manchikanti P, Dey SH.

Author information:
(1)Rajiv Gandhi School of Intellectual Property Law, IIT Kharagpur, Kharagpur 
721302, West Bengal, India.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Herbal drugs are gaining worldwide prominence 
due to their distinct advantages. Developing countries have started exploring 
the ethnopharmacological approach of drug discovery and have begun to file 
patents on herbal drugs. The expansion of R&D in Indian herbal research 
organizations and presence of manufacturing units at non-Indian sites is an 
indication of the capability to develop new products and processes. The present 
study attempts to identify innovations in the Indian herbal drug sector by 
analyzing the patenting trends in India, US and EU.
METHODOLOGY: Based on key word and IPC based search at the IPO, USPTO, Esp@cenet 
and WIPO databases, patent applications and grant in herbal drugs by Indian 
applicants/assignees was collected for the last ten years (from 1st January 2001 
to 31st October 2010). From this collection patents related to human therapeutic 
use only were selected. Analysis was performed to identify filing trends, major 
applicants/assignees, disease area and major plant species used for various 
treatments.
RESULT: There is a gradual increase in patent filing through the years. In 
India, individual inventors have maximum applications and grants. CSIR, among 
research organizations and Hindustan Unilever, Avesthagen, Piramal Life Science, 
Sahajanand Biotech and Indus Biotech among the companies have the maximum 
granted patents in India, US and EU respectively. Diabetes, cancer and 
inflammatory disorders are the major areas for patenting in India and abroad. 
Recent patents are on new herbal formulations for treatment of AIDS, hepatitis, 
skin disorders and gastrointestinal disorders.
CONCLUSION: A majority of the herbal patents applications and grants in India 
are with individual inventors. Claim analysis indicates that these patents 
include novel multi-herb compositions with synergistic action. Indian research 
organizations are more active than companies in filing for patents. CSIR has 
maximum numbers of applications not only in India but also in the US and EU. 
Patents by research organizations and herbal companies are on development of new 
processes for active compound isolation and standardization of such components 
in addition to new compositions for therapeutic use. Pharmaceutical companies 
such as Ranbaxy, Lupin and Panacea Biotec are increasingly patenting on herbal 
drugs. There is increased patenting activity related to diabetes, cancer, 
cardiovascular diseases, asthma and arthritis in India and abroad.

