C. elegans protein interaction network analysis probes RNAi validated 
pro-longevity effect of nhr-6, a human homolog of tumor suppressor Nr4a1.

Akhoon BA(1), Gupta SK(2), Tiwari S(1), Rathor L(1), Pant A(1), Singh N(3), 
Gupta SK(4), Dandekar T(5)(6), Pandey R(7).

Author information:
(1)Microbial Technology and Nematology Department, CSIR - Central Institute of 
Medicinal and Aromatic Plants, Lucknow, 226015, India.
(2)Department of Bioinformatics, Biocenter, University of Würzburg, Wuerzburg, 
97074, Germany.
(3)Department of Bioinformatics, CSIR-Indian Institute of Toxicology Research, 
Lucknow, 226015, India.
(4)Department of Systems Biology and Bioinformatics, University of Rostock, 
Rostock, 18051, Germany.
(5)Department of Bioinformatics, Biocenter, University of Würzburg, Wuerzburg, 
97074, Germany. dandekar@biozentrum.uni-wuerzburg.de.
(6)BioComputing Unit, EMBL Heidelberg, Heidelberg, 69117, Germany. 
dandekar@biozentrum.uni-wuerzburg.de.
(7)Microbial Technology and Nematology Department, CSIR - Central Institute of 
Medicinal and Aromatic Plants, Lucknow, 226015, India. r.pandey@cimap.res.in.

Protein-protein interaction (PPI) studies are gaining momentum these days due to 
the plethora of various high-throughput experimental methods available for 
detecting PPIs. Proteins create complexes and networks by functioning in harmony 
with other proteins and here in silico network biology hold the promise to 
reveal new functionality of genes as it is very difficult and laborious to carry 
out experimental high-throughput genetic screens in living organisms. We 
demonstrate this approach by computationally screening C. elegans conserved 
homologs of already reported human tumor suppressor and aging associated genes. 
We select by this nhr-6, vab-3 and gst-23 as predicted longevity genes for RNAi 
screen. The RNAi results demonstrated the pro-longevity effect of these genes. 
Nuclear hormone receptor nhr-6 RNAi inhibition resulted in a C. elegans 
phenotype of 23.46% lifespan reduction. Moreover, we show that nhr-6 regulates 
oxidative stress resistance in worms and does not affect the feeding behavior of 
worms. These findings imply the potential of nhr-6 as a common therapeutic 
target for aging and cancer ailments, stressing the power of in silico PPI 
network analysis coupled with RNAi screens to describe gene function.

