Tobacco-specific N-nitrosamines and Areca-derived N-nitrosamines: chemistry, 
biochemistry, carcinogenicity, and relevance to humans.

Hoffmann D(1), Brunnemann KD, Prokopczyk B, Djordjevic MV.

Author information:
(1)American Health Foundation, Valhalla, New York 10595.

Nicotine and the minor tobacco alkaloids give rise to tobacco-specific 
N-nitrosamines (TSNA) during tobacco processing and during smoking. 
Chemical-analytical studies led to the identification of seven TSNA in smokeless 
tobacco (< or = 25 micrograms/g) and in mainstream smoke of cigarettes (1.3 
micrograms TSNA/cigarette). Indoor air polluted by tobacco smoke may contain up 
to 24 pg/L of TSNA. In mice, rats, and hamsters, three TSNA, 
N'-nitrosonornicotine (NNN), 4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone 
(NNK), and 4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanol (NNAL), are powerful 
carcinogens; two TSNA are moderately active as carcinogens; and two TSNA appear 
not to be carcinogenic. The TSNA are procarcinogens, agents that require 
metabolic activation. The active forms of the carcinogenic TSNA react with 
cellular components, including DNA, and with hemoglobin (Hb). The Hb adducts in 
chewers and smokers serve as biomarkers for the uptake and metabolic activation 
of carcinogenic TSNA and the urinary excretion of NNAL as free alcohol and as 
glucuronide for the uptake of TSNA. The review presents evidence that strongly 
supports the concept that TSNA contribute to the increased risk for cancer of 
the upper digestive tract in tobacco chewers and for the increased risk of lung 
cancer, especially pulmonary adenocarcinoma, in smokers. The high incidence of 
cancer of the upper digestive tract especially among men on the Indian 
subcontinent has been causally associated with chewing of betel quid mixed with 
tobacco. In addition to the TSNA, the betel quid chewers are exposed to four 
N-nitrosamines that are formed during chewing from the Areca alkaloids, two of 
these N-nitrosamines are carcinogens. The article also reviews approaches toward 
the reduction of the carcinogenic potency of smokeless tobacco, betel 
quid-tobacco mixtures, and cigarette smoke. Although the safest way to reduce 
the risk for tobacco-related cancers is to refrain from chewing and smoking, 
modifications of smokeless tobacco and of cigarettes are indicated to lead to 
less toxic products. Another more recent approach for reducing the carcinogenic 
effect of tobacco products is the application of chemopreventive agents, 
primarily of micronutrients. Future aspects in tobacco carcinogenesis, 
especially as it relates to TSNA, are expected in the field of molecular 
biochemistry and in biomarker studies, with the goal of identifying those 
tobacco and betel quid chewers and tobacco smokers who are at especially high 
risk for cancer.

