Extract from Aphloia theiformis, an edible indigenous plant from Reunion Island, 
impairs Zika virus attachment to the host cell surface.

Clain E(1), Sinigaglia L(2), Koishi AC(3), Gorgette O(4), Gadea G(1), 
Viranaicken W(1), Krejbich-Trotot P(1), Mavingui P(1), Desprès P(1), Nunes 
Duarte Dos Santos C(3), Guiraud P(1), Jouvenet N(2), El Kalamouni C(5).

Author information:
(1)Université de La Réunion, UM134 Processus Infectieux Insulaire Tropical 
(PIMIT), INSERM U1187, CNRS UMR 9192, IRD UMR 249, Plateforme Technologique 
CYROI, 97490, Sainte, Clotilde, France.
(2)UMR CNRS 3569, Viral Genomics and Vaccination Unit, Pasteur Institute, 75724, 
Paris, France.
(3)Laboratorio de Virologia Molecular, Instituto Carlos Chagas, ICC/FIOCRUZ/PR, 
Curitiba, Parana, Brazil.
(4)Ultrastructural BioImaging (UTechsUBI), Pasteur Institute, 75724, Paris, 
France.
(5)Université de La Réunion, UM134 Processus Infectieux Insulaire Tropical 
(PIMIT), INSERM U1187, CNRS UMR 9192, IRD UMR 249, Plateforme Technologique 
CYROI, 97490, Sainte, Clotilde, France. chaker.el-kalamouni@univ-reunion.fr.

The mosquito-borne Zika virus (ZIKV) belongs to the flavivirus genus of the 
Flaviviridae family. Contemporary epidemic strains of ZIKV are associated with 
congenital malformations in infants, including microcephaly, as well as 
Guillain-Barré syndrome in adults. A risk of human-to-human transmission of ZIKV 
is also well documented. A worldwide research effort has been undertaken to 
identify safe and effective strategies to prevent or treat ZIKV infection. We 
show here that extract from Aphloia theiformis, an edible endemic plant from 
Indian Ocean islands, exerts a potent antiviral effect against ZIKV strains of 
African and Asian lineages, including epidemic strains. The antiviral effect of 
A. theiformis extract was extended to clinical isolates of dengue virus (DENV) 
of the four serotypes in human hepatocytes. A. theiformis inhibited virus entry 
in host cells by acting directly on viral particles, thus impairing their 
attachment to the cell surface. Electron microscopic observations revealed that 
organization of ZIKV particles was severely affected by A. theiformis. We 
propose a model of antiviral action for A. theiformis against flaviviruses that 
highlights the potential of medicinal plants as promising sources of 
naturally-derived antiviral compounds to prevent ZIKV and DENV infections.

