The tumor proteasome is a primary target for the natural anticancer compound 
Withaferin A isolated from "Indian winter cherry".

Yang H(1), Shi G, Dou QP.

Author information:
(1)The Prevention Program, Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer Institute, and Department 
of Pathology, School of Medicine, Wayne State University, 640.1 HWCRC, 4100 John 
R Road, Detroit, MI 48201, USA.

Erratum in
    Mol Pharmacol. 2015 May;87(5):865.

Withaferin A (WA) is a steroidal lactone purified from medicinal plant "Indian 
Winter Cherry" that is widely researched for its variety of properties, 
including antitumor effects. However, the primary molecular target of WA is 
unknown. By chemical structure analysis, we hypothesized that Withaferin A might 
be a natural proteasome inhibitor. Computational modeling studies consistently 
predict that C1 and C24 of WA are highly susceptible toward a nucleophilic 
attack by the hydroxyl group of N-terminal threonine of the proteasomal 
chymotrypsin subunit beta5. Furthermore, WA potently inhibits the 
chymotrypsin-like activity of a purified rabbit 20S proteasome (IC50=4.5 microM) 
and 26S proteasome in human prostate cancer cultures (at 5-10 microM) and 
xenografts (4-8 mg/kg/day). Inhibition of prostate tumor cellular proteasome 
activity in cultures and in vivo by WA results in accumulation of ubiquitinated 
proteins and three proteasome target proteins (Bax, p27, and IkappaB-alpha) 
accompanied by androgen receptor protein suppression (in androgen-dependent 
LNCaP cells) and apoptosis induction. Treatment of WA under conditions of the 
aromatic ketone reduction, or reduced form of Celastrol, had significantly 
decreased the proteasome-inhibitory and apoptosis-inducing activities. Treatment 
of human prostate PC-3 xenografts with WA for 24 days resulted in 70% inhibition 
of tumor growth in nude mice, associated with 56% inhibition of the tumor tissue 
proteasomal chymotrypsinlike activity. Our results demonstrate that the tumor 
proteasome beta5 subunit is the primary target of WA, and inhibition of the 
proteasomal chymotrypsin-like activity by WA in vivo is responsible for, or 
contributes to, the antitumor effect of this ancient medicinal compound.
