Genoproteomics-assisted improvement of Andrographis paniculata: toward a 
promising molecular and conventional breeding platform for autogamous plants 
affecting the pharmaceutical industry.

Valdiani A(1), Talei D(2), Lattoo SK(3), Ortiz R(4), Rasmussen SK(5), Batley 
J(6), Rafii MY(7), Maziah M(1)(7)(8), Sabu KK(9), Abiri R(1), Sakuanrungsirikul 
S(10), Tan SG(11).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Biotechnology and Biomolecular 
Sciences , Universiti Putra Malaysia , Selangor , Malaysia.
(2)b Medicinal Plants Research Center , Shahed University , Tehran , Iran.
(3)c Plant Biotechnology Division , CSIR - Indian Institute of Integrative 
Medicine , Jammu , India.
(4)d Department of Plant Breeding , Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences 
(SLU) , Alnarp , Sweden.
(5)e Department of Plant and Environmental Science, Faculty of Sciences , 
University of Copenhagen , Copenhagen , Denmark.
(6)f School of Plant Biology , University of Western Australia , Crawley , WA , 
Australia.
(7)g Institute of Tropical Agriculture , Universiti Putra Malaysia , Selangor , 
DE , Malaysia.
(8)h Institute of Bioscience , Universiti Putra Malaysia , Selangor , Malaysia.
(9)i Jawaharlal Nehru Tropical Botanic Garden and Research Institute , Palode, 
Thiruvananthapuram , India.
(10)j Khon Kaen Field Crops Research Center, Field and Energy Renewable Crops 
Research, Institute , Department of Agriculture, Ministry of Agriculture and 
Cooperatives , Khon Kaen , Thailand.
(11)k Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Biotechnology and 
Biomolecular Sciences , Universiti Putra Malaysia , Selangor , Malaysia.

Andrographis paniculata (Burm. f.) Wall. ex Nees. (AP) is a hermaphroditic, 
self-compatible, and habitual inbreeding plant. Its main bioactive component is 
andrographolide, which is capable of inducing autophagic cell death in some 
human cancer cells and helps fight HIV/AIDS. Increasing the andrographolide 
content by investigating the genetic mechanisms controlling its biosynthesis in 
order to improve and develop high-yielding cultivars are the main breeding 
targets for AP. However, there might exist some limitations or barriers for 
crossability within AP accessions. Recently, this problem was addressed in AP by 
using a combination of crossbreeding and biotechnology-aided genetic methods. 
This review emphasizes that development of a breeding platform in a 
hard-to-breed plant, such as AP, requires the involvement of a broad range of 
methods from classical genetics to molecular breeding. To this end, a 
phenological stage (for example, flowering and stigma development) can be 
simplified to a quantitative morphological trait (for example, bud or stigma 
length) to be used as an index to express the highest level of receptivity in 
order to manage outcrossing. The outcomes of the basic crossability research can 
be then employed in diallel mating and crossbreeding. This review explains how 
genomic data could produce useful information regarding genetic distance and its 
influence on the crossability of AP accessions. Our review indicates that 
co-dominant DNA markers, such as microsatellites, are also capable of resolving 
the evolutionary pathway and cryptic features of plant populations and such 
information can be used to select the best breeding strategy. This review also 
highlights the importance of proteomic analysis as a breeding tool. In this 
regard, protein diversification, as well as the impact of normal and 
stress-responsive proteins on morphometric and physiological behaviors, could be 
used in breeding programs. These findings have immense potential for improving 
plant production and, therefore, can be regarded as prospective breeding 
platforms for medicinal plants that have an autogamous mode of reproduction. 
Finally, this review suggests that novel site-directed genome editing approaches 
such as TALENs (Transcription Activator-Like Effector Nucleases) and CRISPR 
(clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats)/Cas9 
(CRISPR-associated protein-9 nuclease) systems together with other new plant 
breeding technologies (NPBT) should simultaneously be taken into consideration 
for improvement of pharmaceutical plants.