A novel high throughput screening assay for HCV NS3 serine protease inhibitors.

Berdichevsky Y(1), Zemel R, Bachmatov L, Abramovich A, Koren R, Sathiyamoorthy 
P, Golan-Goldhirsh A, Tur-Kaspa R, Benhar I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Biotechnology, The George S. Wise 
Faculty of Life Sciences, Green Building, Room 202, Tel-Aviv University, 69978, 
Ramat Aviv, Israel.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection is a major worldwide health problem, causing 
chronic hepatitis, liver cirrhosis and primary liver cancer (Hepatocellular 
carcinoma). HCV encodes a precursor polyprotein that is enzymatically cleaved to 
release the individual viral proteins. The viral non-structural proteins are 
cleaved by the HCV NS3 serine protease. NS3 is regarded currently as a potential 
target for anti-viral drugs thus specific inhibitors of its enzymatic activity 
should be of importance. A prime requisite for detailed biochemical studies of 
the protease and its potential inhibitors is the availability of a rapid 
reliable in vitro assay of enzyme activity. A novel assay for measurement of HCV 
NS3 serine protease activity was developed for screening of HCV NS3 serine 
protease potential inhibitors. Recombinant NS3 serine protease was isolated and 
purified, and a fluorometric assay for NS3 proteolytic activity was developed. 
As an NS3 substrate we engineered a recombinant fusion protein where a green 
fluorescent protein is linked to a cellulose-binding domain via the NS5A/B site 
that is cleavable by NS3. Cleavage of this substrate by NS3 results in emission 
of fluorescent light that is easily detected and quantitated by fluorometry. 
Using our system we identified NS3 serine protease inhibitors from extracts 
obtained from natural Indian Siddha medicinal plants. Our unique fluorometric 
assay is very sensitive and has a high throughput capacity making it suitable 
for screening of potential NS3 serine protease inhibitors.