Overview of the anticancer activity of withaferin A, an active constituent of 
the Indian ginseng Withania somnifera.

Sivasankarapillai VS(1), Madhu Kumar Nair R(2), Rahdar A(3), Bungau S(4), Zaha 
DC(5), Aleya L(6), Tit DM(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, NSS Hindu College, Changanacherry, Kerala, 686102, 
India.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Mar Thoma College, Thiruvalla, Kerala, 689103, 
India.
(3)Department of Physics, Faculty of Science,, University of Zabol, Zabol, Iran.
(4)Department of Pharmacy, Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy,, University of 
Oradea, 410028, Oradea, Romania.
(5)Department of Preclinical Disciplines, Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy,, 
University of Oradea, 410028, Oradea, Romania.
(6)Laboratoire Chrono-environnement CNRS 6249, Université de Franche-Comté, 
Besançon, France. danaczaha@gmail.com.

Cancer is still considered a "hopeless case", besides all of the advancements in 
oncology research. On the other hand, the natural products, as effective lead 
molecules, have gained significant interest for research due to the absence of 
toxic and harmful side effects usually associated with conventional treatment 
methods. Medicinal properties of herbal plants are strongly evidenced in 
traditional medicine from ancient times. In the context above, withaferin A (WA) 
was identified as the active principle of the plant Withania somnifera, its 
molecule being reported to have excellent anticancer and tumour inhibition 
activities in various cell lines. Furthermore, the in silico approaches in the 
medicinal chemistry of WA revealed the biological targets and gave momentum for 
the research that leads to many amazing pharmacological activities of WA which 
are not yet explored. This includes a broad spectrum of anticancer actions 
manifested in different organs (breast, pancreas, colon), melanoma and B cell 
lymphoma, etc. This review is an extensive survey of the most recent anticancer 
studies reported for WA, along with its mechanism of action and details about 
its in vitro and/or in vivo behaviour.

