Aucklandia costus (syn. Saussurea costus): Ethnopharmacology of an endangered 
medicinal plant of the Himalayan region.

Nadda RK(1), Ali A(2), Goyal RC(3), Khosla PK(1), Goyal R(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Biological and Environmental Sciences, Shoolini University, Solan, 
Himachal Pradesh, 173229, India.
(2)School of Biotechnology, Shoolini University, Solan, Himachal Pradesh, 
173229, India.
(3)Department of Forest Products, Dr. Yashwant Singh Parmar University of 
Horticulture and Forestry, Solan, Himachal Pradesh, 173230, India.
(4)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Sciences, Shoolini University, Solan, 
Himachal Pradesh, 173229, India. Electronic address: 
rohitgoyal@shooliniuniversity.com.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Aucklandia costus Falc. a medicinal plant is 
native to the Himalayan region and synonymous with Saussurea costus, Saussurea 
lappa, and Aucklandia lappa. It has an ancient background of being used 
ethnopharmacologically for various body ailments. According to Ayurveda, Unani, 
Siddha, and Traditional Chinese Medicine, Costus roots are recommended for 
leukoderma, liver, kidney, blood disorders, Qi stagnation, and tridosha. Root 
and powder are used orally with warm water to cure gastric problems, and the 
paste is applied to the inflamed area to relieve pain. Root paste is applied on 
the skin to cure boils, blisters, and leprosy.
AIM OF THE STUDY: The aim of the present review is to establish a correlation 
among the ethnopharmacological uses and scientific studies conducted on A. 
costus with chemical constituents, safety & toxicity data including future 
directions for its conservation with higher yield and effect.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The study was conducted by studying books, research 
papers, and literature in history, agroforestry, phytopharmacology of Himalayan 
plants using international databases, publication, Red data book, and reports. 
The search engines: Pubmed, Scopus, Wiley Inter-science, Indian Materia Medica, 
Science Direct, and referred journals are referenced.
RESULTS: The literature collected from databases, journals, websites, and books 
mentioned the use of costus roots in local and traditional practices. CITES 
included A. costus in a critically endangered category due to lack of cultural 
practices and overexploitation from wild. A. costus roots are known since 13th 
century for use in ancient Ayurvedic products but the scientific evaluation is 
of future research interest. A correlation of traditional uses with scientific 
studies has been explored to assess the effect of root powder, extract, oil and 
isolated constituents: Costunolids, Saussureamine B and Dehydrocostus lactone 
etc. in gastric ulceration and lesions; inhibition of antigen-induced 
degranulation, mucin production, number of immune cells, eosinophils, and 
expression and secretion of Th2 cytokines (IL-4 and IL-13) in asthma. The 
inhibition of pro-inflammatory mediators is also reported by Cynaropicrin, 
Alantolactone, Caryophyllene, Costic acid. Also, the sesquiterpene lactones has 
profound effect in inhibition of inflammatory stages and induced apoptotic 
cascades in cancer. Very few data on the safety and toxicity of plant parts have 
been noted which needs to be evaluated scientifically.
CONCLUSION: A. costus have been noted to have remarkable effect for gastric, 
hepatic, inflammatory, respiratory, cancer, skin problems but there were several 
errors in selection of plant material, authentification, selection of dose, 
assessment, selection of standard and control have been identified. Therefore, a 
schematic drug development and research strategy exploiting the potential of 
plant extract, fraction, products and probable constituents, costunolide, 
dehydrocostus lactone, cynaropicrin, saussureamine assuring dose-response 
relationship and safety may be determined under pre-clinical which may be 
extrapolated to clinical level. An evaluation of phytochemicals in A. costus 
collected from different geographical location in Himalayas may be drawn to 
identify and conserve the higher yielding plant.