Evidence of vanillin binding to CAMKIV explains the anti-cancer mechanism in 
human hepatic carcinoma and neuroblastoma cells.

Naz H(1), Tarique M(2), Khan P(1), Luqman S(3), Ahamad S(4), Islam A(1), Ahmad 
F(1), Hassan MI(5).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Interdisciplinary Research in Basic Sciences,Jamia Millia Islamia, 
Jamia Nagar, New Delhi, 110025, India.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New 
Delhi, 110029, India.
(3)CSIR-Central Institute of Medicinal and Aromatic Plants, Lucknow, 226015, 
India.
(4)Department of Biotechnology, College of Engineering & Technology, IFTM 
University, Lodhipur-Rajput, Delhi Road, Moradabad, India.
(5)Centre for Interdisciplinary Research in Basic Sciences,Jamia Millia Islamia, 
Jamia Nagar, New Delhi, 110025, India. mihassan@jmi.ac.in.

Human calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase IV (CAMKIV) is a member of 
Ser/Thr kinase family, and is associated with different types of cancer and 
neurodegenerative diseases. Vanillin is a natural compound, a primary component 
of the extract of the vanilla bean which possesses varieties of pharmacological 
features including anti-oxidant, anti-inflammatory, anti-bacterial and 
anti-tumor. Here, we have investigated the binding mechanism and affinity of 
vanillin to the CAMKIV which is being considered as a potential drug target for 
cancer and neurodegenerative diseases. We found that vanillin binds strongly to 
the active site cavity of CAMKIV and stabilized by a large number of 
non-covalent interactions. We explored the utility of vanillin as anti-cancer 
agent and found that it inhibits the proliferation of human hepatocyte carcinoma 
(HepG2) and neuroblastoma (SH-SY5Y) cells in a dose-dependent manner. 
Furthermore, vanillin treatment resulted into the significant reduction in the 
mitochondrial membrane depolarization and ROS production that eventually leads 
to apoptosis in HepG2 and SH-SY5Y cancer cells. These findings may offer a novel 
therapeutic approach by targeting the CAMKIV using natural product and its 
derivative with a minimal side effect.
