Evaluation of acute and subacute toxicity of aqueous extract of Crassocephalum 
rubens leaves in rats.

Adewale OB(1), Onasanya A(2), Anadozie SO(2), Abu MF(2), Akintan IA(2), Ogbole 
CJ(2), Olayide II(2), Afolabi OB(2), Jaiyesimi KF(2), Ajiboye BO(2), Fadaka 
AO(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical Sciences, Biochemistry Unit, Afe Babalola University, 
Km 8.5, Afe Babalola Way, P.M.B. 5454, Ado-Ekiti, Ekiti State, Nigeria. 
Electronic address: solaustine2003@yahoo.com.
(2)Department of Chemical Sciences, Biochemistry Unit, Afe Babalola University, 
Km 8.5, Afe Babalola Way, P.M.B. 5454, Ado-Ekiti, Ekiti State, Nigeria.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Crassocephalum rubens is found throughout 
tropical Africa including the Indian Ocean islands. The leaves are commonly 
eaten in form of soups and sauces in South-Western Nigeria, also in other humid 
zones of Africa. Traditionally, it is used as an antidote against any form of 
poisoning; used to treat stomach and liver complaints; and externally to treat 
burns, sore eyes, earache, leprosy and breast cancer. In this study, acute and 
subacute toxicity of aqueous extract of C. rubens leaves was evaluated in rats 
in order to assess its safety profile.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In acute toxicity study, rats were given a single oral 
administration of aqueous extract of C. rubens leaves at graded doses 
(250-5000mg/kg). The animals were monitored for behavioural changes and possible 
mortality over a period of 24h and thereafter, for 14 days. In the subacute 
toxicity study, rats of both sexes were administered C. rubens orally at doses 
of 250mg/kg, 500mg/kg, 750mg/kg and 1000mg/kg body weight daily, for 28 days. 
Rats were observed weekly for any changes in general behaviour and body weights. 
In addition, other relevant parameters were assayed at the end of the main and 
reversibility study periods.
RESULTS: There was no observed adverse effect; including mortality in the 
animals. The extract caused no significant difference in the body weights as 
well as organs weights of treated groups when compared with the control groups. 
Haematological and biochemical parameters also revealed no toxic effects of the 
extract on rats. Histological assessments were normal in liver and kidney.
CONCLUSIONS: It can therefore be suggested based on the results from this study 
that aqueous extract of C. rubens leaves, at dosage levels up to 1000mg/kg, is 
non-toxic and could also offer protection on some body tissues. Aqueous extract 
of C. rubens could therefore, be considered safe. This study supports the 
application of Crassocephalum rubens in traditional medicine.

