Anticancer Potential of Dietary Natural Products: A Comprehensive Review.

Ahmad R(1), Khan MA(2), Srivastava AN(3), Gupta A(1), Srivastava A(1), Jafri 
TR(1), Siddiqui Z(3), Chaubey S(1), Khan T(4), Srivastava AK(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Era's Lucknow Medical College & Hospital, Era 
University, Sarfarazganj, Lucknow-226003, UP, India.
(2)Chancellor, Era University, Sarfarazganj, Hardoi Road, Lucknow-226003, UP, 
India.
(3)Department of Pathology, Era's Lucknow Medical College & Hospital, Era 
University, Sarfarazganj, Lucknow-226003, UP, India.
(4)Department of Chemistry, Integral University, Dasauli, P.O. Bas-ha, Kursi 
Road, Lucknow 226026, UP, India.
(5)Department of Food and Nutrition, Era University, Sarfarazganj, 
Lucknow-226003, UP, India.

Nature is a rich source of natural drug-like compounds with minimal side 
effects. Phytochemicals better known as "Natural Products" are found abundantly 
in a number of plants. Since time immemorial, spices have been widely used in 
Indian cuisine as flavoring and coloring agents. Most of these spices and 
condiments are derived from various biodiversity hotspots in India (which 
contribute 75% of global spice production) and form the crux of India's 
multidiverse and multicultural cuisine. Apart from their aroma, flavor and 
taste, these spices and condiments are known to possess several medicinal 
properties also. Most of these spices are mentioned in the Ayurveda, the 
indigenous system of medicine. The antimicrobial, antioxidant, 
antiproliferative, antihypertensive and antidiabetic properties of several of 
these natural products are well documented in Ayurveda. These phytoconstituemts 
are known to act as functional immunoboosters, immunomodulators as well as 
anti-inflammatory agents. As anticancer agents, their mechanistic action 
involves cancer cell death via induction of apoptosis, necrosis and autophagy. 
The present review provides a comprehensive and collective update on the 
potential of 66 commonly used spices as well as their bioactive constituents as 
anticancer agents. The review also provides an in-depth update of all major in 
vitro, in vivo, clinical and pharmacological studies done on these spices with 
special emphasis on the potential of these spices and their bioactive 
constituents as potential functional foods for prevention, treatment and 
management of cancer.

