Emblica officinalis (Amla): A review for its phytochemistry, ethnomedicinal uses 
and medicinal potentials with respect to molecular mechanisms.

Variya BC(1), Bakrania AK(1), Patel SS(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Institute of Pharmacy, Nirma University, 
Ahmedabad 382481, Gujarat, India.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, Institute of Pharmacy, Nirma University, 
Ahmedabad 382481, Gujarat, India. Electronic address: 
snehal.patel@nirmauni.ac.in.

Medicinal plants, having great elementary and therapeutic importance, are the 
gift to mankind to acquire healthy lifestyle. Emblica officinalis Gaertn. or 
Phyllanthus emblica Linn. (Euphorbeaceae), commonly known as Indian gooseberry 
or Amla, has superior value in entirely indigenous traditional system of 
medicine, including folklore Ayurveda, for medicinal and nutritional purposes to 
build up lost vitality and vigor. In this article, numerous phytochemicals 
isolated from E. officinalis and its ethnomedical and pharmacological potentials 
with molecular mechanisms are briefly deliberated and recapitulated. The 
information documented in the present review was collected from more than 270 
articles, published or accepted in the last five to six decades, and more than 
20 e-books using various online database. Additional information was obtained 
from various botanical books and dissertations. The extracts from various parts 
of E. officinalis, especially fruit, contain numerous phytoconstituents viz. 
higher amount of polyphenols like gallic acid, ellagic acid, different tannins, 
minerals, vitamins, amino acids, fixed oils, and flavonoids like rutin and 
quercetin. The extract or plant is identified to be efficacious against 
diversified ailments like inflammation, cancer, osteoporosis, neurological 
disorders, hypertension together with lifestyle diseases, parasitic and other 
infectious disorders. These actions are attributed to either regulation of 
various molecular pathway involved in several pathophysiologies or antioxidant 
property which prevents the damage of cellular compartments from oxidative 
stress. However, serious efforts are required in systemic research to identify, 
isolate and evaluate the chemical constituents for nutritional and therapeutic 
potentials