Health-promoting and disease-preventive potential of Trianthema portulacastrum 
Linn. (Gadabani) -An Indian medicinal and dietary plant.

Yamaki J(1)(2), Nagulapalli Venkata KC(3), Mandal A(4), Bhattacharyya P(5), 
Bishayee A(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy Practice, School of Pharmacy, Chapman University, 
Irvine, CA 92618, USA.
(2)Hoag Memorial Hospital Presbyterian, Newport Beach, CA 92663, USA.
(3)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, Larkin Health 
Sciences Institute, Miami, FL 33169, USA.
(4)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, Northeast Ohio 
Medical University, Rootstown, OH 44272, USA.
(5)School of Health Sciences, University of Turabo, Gurabo, PR 00778, USA.

It is estimated that 80% of the world population depends on traditional medicine 
for primary healthcare need. Trianthema portulacastrum Linn. (family: Aizoaceae) 
is a small perennial weed found in the Americas, Africa, India, and other 
regions of the world. This plant is used extensively in Indian traditional 
medicines and is also consumed as a vegetable throughout Asia for its perceived 
health benefits. Phytochemical analysis of T. portulacastrum reveals the 
presence of alkaloids, flavonoids, terpenoids, saponins, and phenolic compounds. 
Emerging studies demonstrate that crude extracts as well as bioactive 
phytoconstituents of T. portulacastrum exhibit potent antioxidant, 
anti-infective, analgesic, and anti-inflammatory activities. A growing number of 
in vitro and in vivo studies demonstrate various biological and pharmacological 
activities, including prevention and amelioration of hepatotoxicity, 
nephrotoxicity, hyperglycemia, hyperlipidemia, infectious diseases and cancer. 
This review aims to present and analyze available literature to understand the 
full potential of T. portulacastrum in health promotion and disease prevention. 
Current limitations and future directions of research on this medicinal and 
dietary plant are also critically discussed.
