Extract of Penicillium sclerotiorum an endophytic fungus isolated from Cassia 
fistula L. induces cell cycle arrest leading to apoptosis through mitochondrial 
membrane depolarization in human cervical cancer cells.

Kuriakose GC(1), Lakshmanan M D(2), Bp A(1), Rs HK(1), Th AK(1), Ananthaswamy 
K(1), C J(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 560012, 
India.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 560012, 
India; Yenepoya Research Centre, Yenepoya University, University Road, Mangalore 
575018, India.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 560012, 
India. Electronic address: cjb@biochem.iisc.ernet.in.

Seventeen endophytic fungi were isolated from various tissues of Cassia fistula 
and the ethyl acetate extracts obtained from 21-day cultures of all the 
endophytic fungal isolates were initially screened for their cytotoxicity 
against HeLa (human cervical carcinoma) cells using MTT assay. Of these, 
Penicillium sclerotiorum extract (PSE), significantly affected the viability of 
HeLa cells in a dose-dependent manner. The extract of P. Sclerotiorum was 
further analyzed by GC-MS, which showed three compounds, hexadecanoic acid, 
oleic acid and benzoic acid to be the major active principles in the 
extracts.The extract was further tested for invitro cytotoxicity against five 
cancer cell lines. Of the cell lines tested, HeLa cells showed maximum 
sensitivity followed by A549, while A431 and U251 were moderately sensitive and 
MCF-7 was insensitive to the treatment. In addition, normal human embryonic 
kidney cells, HEK293 remained insensitive to the treatment. Furthermore, the 
mechanism of cytotoxic activity exhibited by PSE was investigated by evaluating 
cell cycle progression and apoptotic induction in HeLa cells. Cell cycle 
analysis revealed that the PSE arrested cells at S and G2/M phase of the cell 
cycle in a dose-dependent manner. Annexin V- Propidium iodide double staining 
showed that, the extract potentiates apoptosis rather than necrosis in cells. 
This was supported by the down regulation in the proapoptotic protein BCL2 and 
up regulation of BAX (BCL2 Associated X), tumor suppressor protein, p53 and 
Apaf-1 [Apoptotic Peptidase Activating Factor 1]. Loss of mitochondrial membrane 
potential and a distinct DNA fragmentation pattern observed following the 
treatment, suggest that the PSE treatment leads to activation of mitochondrial 
pathway of apoptosis. Further, the extract also exhibited both antioxidant and 
anti-angiogenic properties. These results indicate that endophytic fungi 
isolated from medicinal plants may serve as potential sources of the 
anti-cancerous compounds.

