Cytotoxic activity of selected West Indian medicinal plants against a human 
leukaemia cell line.

Ramcharan G(1), Clement YN, Maxwell AR.

Author information:
(1)Pharmacology Unit, Faculty of Medical Sciences, The University of the West 
Indies, St Augustine, Trinidad and Tobago, West Indies.

OBJECTIVE: To assess the cytotoxic activities of crude extracts and solvent 
fractions of Spermacoce verticillata, Ficus pumila and Flemingia strobilifera 
against a MT-4 human leukaemia cancer cell line.
METHODS: Crude extracts of dried leaves of S verticillata, F pumila and F 
strobilifera were made by exhaustive methanol extraction, fractions were 
obtained from sequential extraction of the crude extract using solvents of 
increasing polarity. Dose responses corresponding to cell survival following 
72-hour exposure to the extracts were determined using a leukaemia cancer cell 
line (MT-4). Cell viability was assessed using the MTT[3-(4, 
5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2, 5-diphenyl tetrazolium bromide] assay reading 
absorbances at 570 nm. Comparisons were made with controls and cell survival, in 
each sample well, was determined based on the ratio of the absorbance of the 
sample to the control.
RESULTS: Crude extracts of S verticillata, F pumila and F strobilifera displayed 
cytotoxicity and the IC50 values were 89 microg/ml, 131 microg/ml and 81 
microg/ml, respectively. The petroleum ether and chloroform fractions of the 
crude extracts of S verticillata and F strobilifera showed potent cytotoxic 
activity but the highest cytotoxic activity was found in the chloroform and 
butanol fractions of F pumila with IC50 values of 23 microg/ml and 26 microg/ml, 
respectively.
CONCLUSION: The crude extracts of S verticillata, F pumila and F strobilifera 
were shown to be cytotoxic to the leukaemia cell line, MT-4 and IC50 values were 
determined. Fractionation of the crude extracts by solvent-solvent extraction 
enabled determination of the active fractions and their IC50 values. We propose 
that cytotoxic activity may be due to antioxidant compounds previously isolated 
from these plants.
