In Vitro Production of Echioidinin, 7-O-Methywogonin from Callus Cultures of 
Andrographis lineata and Their Cytotoxicity on Cancer Cells.

Mohammed A(1), Chiruvella KK(2), Rao YK(3), Geethangili M(3), Raghavan SC(4), 
Ghanta RG(5).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Agrobased Industry, Universiti Malaysia Kelantan, Jeli Campus, 
Locked bag-100, 17600, Jeli, Kelantan, Malaysia; Division of Plant Tissue 
Culture, Department of Botany, Sri Venkateswara University, Tirupati, Andhra 
Pradesh, India.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 560 012, 
India; Division of Plant Tissue Culture, Department of Botany, Sri Venkateswara 
University, Tirupati, Andhra Pradesh, India.
(3)Department of Applied Chemistry, Chaoyang University of Technology, Taichung, 
Taiwan.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 560 012, 
India.
(5)Division of Plant Tissue Culture, Department of Botany, Sri Venkateswara 
University, Tirupati, Andhra Pradesh, India.

Andrographis lineata is an herbal medicinal plant used in traditional medicine 
as a substitute for Andrographis paniculata. Here, using mature leaf explants of 
A. lineata we demonstrate for the first time the callus induction established on 
MS medium containing 1.0 mg l-1 IAA. Dried callus was subjected to solvent 
extraction with acetone. Further the acetone residue was separated by silica gel 
column chromatography, crystallized and characterized on the basis of nuclear 
magnetic resonance (proton and c13) and liquid chromatographic mass 
spectroscopy. This analysis revealed the occurrence of two known flavones 
namely, 7-O-methylwogonin (MW) and Echioidinin (ED). Furthermore, these 
compounds were tested for their cytotoxicity against leukemic cell line, CEM. We 
identify that ED and MW induced cytotoxicity in a time- and 
concentration-dependent manner. Further increase in the LDH release upon 
treatment with ED and MW further confirmed our cytotoxicity results against 
leukemic cell line. Strikingly, MW was more potent than ED when compared by 
trypan blue and MTT assays. Our results recapitulate the utility of callus 
cultures for the production of plant specific bioactive secondary metabolites 
instead of using wild plants. Together, our in vitro studies provide new 
insights of A. lineata callus cultures serving as a source for cancer 
chemotherapeutic agents.
