Selective induction of DNA damage, G2 abrogation, and mitochondrial apoptosis by 
leaf extract of traditional medicinal plant Wrightia arborea in K562 cells.

Lakshmipriya T(1), Soumya T(1), Jayasree PR(2), Manish Kumar PR(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology, University of Calicut, Malappuram, Kerala, 
673635, India.
(2)School of Health sciences, University of Calicut, Malappuram, 673635, India.
(3)Department of Biotechnology, University of Calicut, Malappuram, Kerala, 
673635, India. manishramakrishnan@rediffmail.com.

Plants have proved to be an important source of anti-cancer drugs. Wrightia 
arborea, an Indian Ayurvedic medicinal plant, is used traditionally to treat a 
variety of ailments. This study evaluates the antiproliferative/apoptotic 
potential of Wrightia arborea leaf extracts, prepared in different organic 
solvents, on cancer cell lines. MTT assay, light and fluorescence microscopy, 
flow cytometry, DNA laddering, alkaline comet assay, and western blotting were 
some of the techniques used for evaluation. Combinations of camptothecin, either 
with CHK1 inhibitor-PD407824 or with W. arborea leaf extract, were deployed to 
determine the G2 abrogating potential of the extract. The chloroform extract 
(WAC) selectively killed K562 cells, without affecting cancerous MCF-7, Hep G2 
cells, and normal human peripheral blood lymphocytes. Cell death was 
characterized by observation of apoptotic bodies, increased Ca2+ and ROS, 
phosphatidyl serine externalization, mitochondrial membrane depolarization, DNA 
laddering, increased sub-G1 population, and altered expression of caspase 3, -9, 
and PARP. WAC also induced DNA damage, alterations in key G2/M phase protein 
expression, cell cycle perturbation, and potent G2 abrogation. The present study 
showed that W. arborea leaf extract, WAC, is capable of selectively killing 
leukemic cancer cells leaving normal lymphocytes unaffected. Our results 
indicate that this is effectuated through DNA damage and G2 abrogation leading 
to mitochondrial apoptosis. Taken together, this report contributes toward a 
better understanding of the anticancer properties of this traditional medicinal 
plant extract possessing valuable bioactive constituents which can serve as a 
bioresource for promising complimentary/alternative/chemopreventive 
therapeutics.