Induction of apoptosis by lupeol in human epidermoid carcinoma A431 cells 
through regulation of mitochondrial, Akt/PKB and NFkappaB signaling pathways.

Prasad S(1), Madan E, Nigam N, Roy P, George J, Shukla Y.

Author information:
(1)Proteomics Laboratory, Indian Institute of Toxicology Research, Mahatma 
Gandhi Marg, Lucknow, India.

Comment in
    Cancer Biol Ther. 2009 Sep;8(17):1648-50.

The rising incidence of skin cancer in humans makes it equivalent to 
malignancies of organs. Therefore, it is necessary to intensify our efforts for 
better understanding and development of novel treatment and preventive 
approaches for skin cancer. Fruits and other plant derived products have gained 
considerable attention as they can reduce the risk of several cancer types. 
Lupeol, a triterpene, present in many fruits and medicinal plants, has been 
shown to possess many pharmacological properties including anti-cancer effect in 
both in vitro and in vivo assay systems. In the present study, apoptosis 
inducing effects of lupeol were studied in human epidermoid carcinoma A431 
cells. Cell cycle analysis showed that lupeol treatment induces apoptosis 
(14-37%) in a dose-dependent manner as evident by an increased sub G(1) cell 
population. The RT-PCR and Western blot analysis showed that lupeol-induced 
apoptosis was associated with caspase dependent mitochondrial cell death pathway 
through activation of Bax, caspases, Apaf1, decrease in Bcl-2 expression and 
subsequent cleavage of PARP. Lupeol treatment also inhibited Akt/PKB signaling 
pathway by inhibition of Bad (Ser136) phosphorylation and 14-3-3 expression. In 
addition, lupeol treatment inhibited cell survival by inactivation of NFkappaB 
through upregulation of its inhibitor Ikappabetaalpha. The Caspase mediated 
apoptosis was noticed by decrease in lupeol induced apoptosis by Caspase 
inhibitors as well as increase in reactive oxygen species generation and loss of 
mitochondrial membrane potential. These results suggest that lupeol could be an 
effective anti-cancer agent and merits further investigation.

