Mucuna pruriens (L.) DC chemo sensitize human breast cancer cells via 
downregulation of prolactin-mediated JAK2/STAT5A signaling.

Sinha S(1), Sharma S(2), Vora J(1), Shah H(3), Srivastava A(2), Shrivastava 
N(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacognosy and Phytochemistry, B. V. Patel Pharmaceutical 
Education and Research Development (PERD) Centre, Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India; 
Registered Ph.D. student at Department of Life Science, School of Science, 
Gujarat University, Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India.
(2)Department of Pharmacognosy and Phytochemistry, B. V. Patel Pharmaceutical 
Education and Research Development (PERD) Centre, Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India.
(3)Department of Pharmacognosy and Phytochemistry, B. V. Patel Pharmaceutical 
Education and Research Development (PERD) Centre, Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India; 
Department of Biotechnology, National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and 
Research (NIPER)-Ahmedabad, Gandhinagar, 382355, Gujarat, India.
(4)Department of Pharmacognosy and Phytochemistry, B. V. Patel Pharmaceutical 
Education and Research Development (PERD) Centre, Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India. 
Electronic address: neetas@perdcentre.com.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Mucuna pruriens (L.) DC (MP) is an ancient 
Indian medicinal plant traditionally used to treat Parkinson's disease. L-Dopa 
(LD), precursor of dopamine is abundantly found in the seeds of MP. L-dopa is a 
natural inhibitor of prolactin (PRL) hormone which is required to maintain 
lactation in women but it's over production (hyperprolactinemia) plays critical 
role in advancement of breast cancer.
AIM OF THE STUDY: We aim to examine the pharmacological effect of LD and MP on 
this hyperprolactinemia associated breast cancer and related signaling for 
effective management of the disease. We also investigated chemo-sensitizing 
effect of MP on hyperprolactinemia-mediated cisplatin resistance.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Methanolic seed extract of MP were prepared and analysed 
using HPLC. Effect of LD and MP on the cellular viability of breast cancer cells 
(T47D, MCF-7, MDA-MB-468 and MDA-MB-231) were evaluated using MTT assay. 
Further, effect of LD and MP on colony forming potential, DNA damage, cell cycle 
distribution and apoptosis was determined using agar/agarose method, comet assay 
and annexin and PI method followed by FACS analysis. To reveal the molecular 
mechanism involved in the anti-cancer activity of MP, transcriptional and 
translational level analysis of the key proteins involved in the PRL-mediated 
signaling, was performed using RT-PCR and western blot analysis. The effect of 
MP extract on PRL-mediated signaling was validated using dopaminergic agonist 
bromocriptine. MP extract and cisplatin was given in different combination with 
appropriate controls to check their effect on chemo-resistivity of breast cancer 
cells.
RESULTS: Our results demonstrated that MP seed extract has the potential to 
inhibit cellular proliferation of PRL expressing T47D and MCF-7 breast cancer 
cells via induction of DNA damage, G1 phase of cell cycle arrest and apoptosis 
more effectively as compare to LD. Further, MP-mediated anti-cancerous effect 
was associated with the downregulation of PRL expression, further suppressing 
the JAK2/STAT5A/Cyclin D1 signaling pathway which has been validated using 
dopaminergic agonist bromocriptine. Cancer-related hyperprolactinemia confers 
cisplatin resistance, we observed that MP via PRL inhibition, enhances cisplatin 
efficacy after their combinatorial treatment in breast cancer cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, our study suggests that MP could be recommended as 
dietary supplement along with the chemotherapeutic agents against breast cancer.