Sanguinarine and Its Role in Chronic Diseases.

Basu P(1), Kumar GS(2).

Author information:
(1)Biophysical Chemistry Laboratory, Organic and Medicinal Chemistry Division, 
CSIR- Indian Institute of Chemical Biology, 4, Raja S. C. Mullick Road, Kolkata, 
700032, India.
(2)Biophysical Chemistry Laboratory, Organic and Medicinal Chemistry Division, 
CSIR- Indian Institute of Chemical Biology, 4, Raja S. C. Mullick Road, Kolkata, 
700032, India. gskumar@iicb.res.in.

The use of natural products derived from plants as medicines precedes even the 
recorded human history. In the past few years there were renewed interests in 
developing natural compounds and understanding their target specificity for drug 
development for many devastating human diseases. This has been possible due to 
remarkable advancements in the development of sensitive chemistry and biology 
tools. Sanguinarine is a benzophenanthridine alkaloid derived from rhizomes of 
the plant species Sanguinaria canadensis. The alkaloid can exist in the cationic 
iminium and neutral alkanolamine forms. Sanguinarine is an excellent DNA and RNA 
intercalator where only the iminium ion binds. Both forms of the alkaloid, 
however, shows binding to functional proteins like serum albumins, lysozyme and 
hemoglobin. The molecule is endowed with remarkable biological activities and 
large number of studies on its various activities has been published 
potentiating its development as a therapeutic agent particularly for chronic 
human diseases like cancer, asthma, etc. In this article, we review the 
properties of this natural alkaloid, and its diverse medicinal applications in 
relation to how it modulates cell death signaling pathways and induce apoptosis 
through different ways, its utility as a therapeutic agent for chronic diseases 
and its biological effects in animal and human models. These data may be useful 
to understand the therapeutic potential of this important and highly abundant 
alkaloid that may aid in the development of sanguinarine-based therapeutic 
agents with high efficacy and specificity.
