In vitro antioxidant and antiproliferative potential of medicinal plants used in 
traditional Indian medicine to treat cancer.

Baskar AA(1), Al Numair KS, Alsaif MA, Ignacimuthu S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Community Health Sciences, College of Applied Medical Sciences, 
King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

OBJECTIVE: The goal of this study was to evaluate the antioxidant and 
antiproliferative activities of 10 traditional medicinal plants, Asclepias 
curassavica, Ophiorrhiza mungos Linn., Cynodon dactylon (L.) Pers, Costus 
speciosus (J. Koenig.) Smith Costaceae, Achyranthes aspera L., Amaranthus 
tristis Roxb., Blepharis maderaspatensis L., Merremia emerginata Hall.f., Aegle 
marmelos Corr., and Tabernaemontana heyneana Wall., used in the traditional 
Indian system of medicine as a cure for cancer. The present study focuses on the 
anticancer potential of traditional medicinal plants to induce apoptosis in 
cancer cell lines.
METHODS: Plants were sequentially extracted with hexane, ethyl acetate, and 
methanol. The extract was concentrated to yield the crude extract, which was 
tested for antioxidant activity using 1,1-diphenyl-2-picrylhydrazyl, nitric 
oxide and 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyl tetrazolium bromide assays 
on four cancer cell lines and a normal cell line. The anticancer potential of 
cytotoxic extracts was determined by the Annexin-fluorescein 
isothiocyanate-conjugated assay in human colon adenocarcinoma cell lines (COLO 
320 DM).
RESULTS: All the tested extracts showed significant antioxidant and 
antiproliferative activities in a concentration- and time-dependant manner in 
the following descending order: A. curassavica > C. dactylon > C. speciosus root 
> A. tristis > M. emarginata > O. mungos > T. Heyneana > B. maderaspatensis > A. 
marmelos > A. aspera.
CONCLUSION: The results of the present study support the need of further studies 
to isolate potential anticancer drug with cancer cell-specific cytotoxicity. 
Additionally, the study supports the anticancer property of medicinal plants 
used in the traditional Indian medicine system and further evaluation of the 
selected medicinal plants for an effective anticancer drug with minimal side 
effects.