Moringa oleifera's Nutritious Aqueous Leaf Extract Has Anticancerous Effects by 
Compromising Mitochondrial Viability in an ROS-Dependent Manner.

Madi N(1), Dany M(2), Abdoun S(3), Usta J(1).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics , American University of 
Beirut, Faculty of Medicine , Beirut , LEBANON.
(2)b Medical University of South Carolina , Charleston , South Carolina.
(3)c Agricultural Engineer , Khartoum , SUDAN.

INTRODUCTION: Moringa oleifera (MO) is an important dietary component for many 
populations in West Africa and the Indian subcontinent. In addition to its 
highly nutritious value, almost all parts of this plant have been widely used in 
folk medicine in curing infectious, cardiovascular, gastrointestinal, hepatic, 
and other diseases. Evidence-based research supported its versatile medicinal 
properties; however, more rigorous research is required to establish it in 
cancer therapy. As such, in this study we aim to investigate the in vitro 
anticancerous effect of Moringa oleifera's aqueous leaf extract.
METHODS: Moringa extract was prepared by soaking pulverized leaves in hot water 
mimicking the people's mode of the leaf drink preparation. Several assays were 
used to study the effect of different percentage concentrations of the extract 
on viability of A549 cells; levels of adenosine triphosphate (ATP), reactive 
oxygen species (ROS), and glutathione (GSH) generated; as well as percentage of 
lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) released at different time points. In addition to 
mitochondrial membrane potential, apoptotic events were assessed using western 
blotting for apoptotic markers and immunoflourescent flourescent labeled 
inhibitor of caspases (FLICA) assay.
RESULTS: MO extract treatment resulted in a significant decrease in 
mitochondrial membrane potential (1 hour) and ATP levels (3 hours), followed by 
an increase in (6 hours) ROS, caspase activation, proapoptotic proteins 
expression (p53, SMAC/Diablo, AIF), and PARP-1 cleavage. This eventually 
resulted in decreased GSH levels and a decrease in viability. The cytotoxic 
effect was prevented upon pretreatment with antioxidant N-acetyl-cysteine. MO 
decreased as well the viability of HepG2, CaCo2, Jurkat, and HEK293 cells.
CONCLUSION: Our findings identify a plant extract with an anticancerous effect 
on cancer cell lines. MO extract exerts its cytotoxic effect in A549 cancer 
cells by affecting mitochondrial viability and inducing apoptosis in an 
ROS-dependent manner.

