Medicinal and Beneficial Health Applications of Tinospora cordifolia (Guduchi): 
A Miraculous Herb Countering Various Diseases/Disorders and its Immunomodulatory 
Effects.

Dhama K(1), Sachan S(2), Khandia R(3), Munjal A(3), Iqbal HMN(4), Latheef SK(2), 
Karthik K(5), Samad HA(6), Tiwari R(7), Dadar M(8).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pathology, ICARIndian Veterinary Research Institute (IVRI), 
Izatnagar, Bareilly-243 122, Uttar Pradesh. India.
(2)Immunology Section, ICAR-Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar, 
Bareilly, Uttar Pradesh. India.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Genetics, Barkatullah University, Bhopal, 
Madhya Pradesh. India.
(4)School of Engineering and Science, Tecnologico de Monterrey, Campus 
Monterrey, Ave. Eugenio Garza Sada 2501, Monterrey, N.L., CP 64849. Mexico.
(5)Central University Laboratory, Tamil Nadu Veterinary and Animal Sciences 
University, Chennai, Tamil Nadu. India.
(6)Division of Physiology and Climatology, ICAR-Indian Veterinary Research 
Institute, Izatnagar, Bareilly- 243 122, Uttar Pradesh. India.
(7)Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Immunology, College of Veterinary 
Sciences, UP Pandit Deen Dayal Upadhayay Pashu Chikitsa Vigyan Vishwavidyalay 
Evum Go-Anusandhan Sansthan (DUVASU), Mathura-281001, Uttar Pradesh. India.
(8)Razi Vaccine and Serum Research Institute, Agricultural Research, Education 
and Extension Organization (AREEO), Karaj. Iran.

BACKGROUND: Plants have been known as an integral part of traditional medicine 
because of their phytoconstituents with their miraculous substances. Tinospora 
cordifolia (Guduchi/ Giloy) is one such plant having pharmacological functions 
and medicinal values due to its several constituents such as terpenes, 
glycosides, alkaloids, steroids and flavonoids. Thus, it has been rightly 
mentioned in old texts as "Amrita".
OBJECTIVE: The objective of the present review is to extend the current 
knowledge, importance and beneficial pharmacological applications of guduchi in 
humans for safeguarding various health issues.
METHODS: We extensively reviewed, analyzed and compiled salient information from 
the published literature available in PubMed and other scientific databases.
RESULTS: The present review describes medicinal applications of T. cordifolia in 
countering various disorders and usages as anti-oxidant, anti-hyperglycemic, 
antihyperlipidemic, hepatoprotective, cardiovascular protective, 
neuroprotective, osteoprotective, radioprotective, anti-anxiety, adaptogenic 
agent, analgesic, anti-inflammatory, antipyretic, a thrombolytic agent, 
anti-diarrheal, anti-ulcer, anti-microbial and anti-cancer agent. The plant is 
also a source of micronutrients viz. copper, calcium, phosphorus, iron, zinc and 
manganese. A special focus has been made on its health benefits in treating 
endocrine and metabolic disorders and its potential as an immune booster. 
Several patents have been filed and granted to inventions encompassing T. 
cordifolia as a major component of therapeutics for ameliorating metabolic, 
endocrinal and several other ailments, aiding in the betterment of human life 
expectancy.
CONCLUSION: The information presented would be beneficial for researchers, 
medical professionals and pharmaceutical companies to design and develop 
effective medicines, drugs and healthical products exploiting the multiple as 
well as specific modes of actions of T. cordifolia, and also help in promoting 
and popularizing this rich herb having promising potentials to prevent and treat 
various ailments.