Chemopreventative strategies targeting the MGMT repair protein: augmented 
expression in human lymphocytes and tumor cells by ethanolic and aqueous 
extracts of several Indian medicinal plants.

Niture SK(1), Rao US, Srivenugopal KS.

Author information:
(1)Center for Cancer Biology, Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Texas Tech 
University Health Sciences Center, Amarillo, TX 79106, USA.

O6-alkylguanines are potent mutagenic, pro-carcinogenic and cytotoxic lesions 
induced by exogenous and endogenous alkylating agents. A facilitated elimination 
of these lesions by increasing the activity of O6-methylguanine-DNA 
methyltransferase (MGMT) is likely to be a beneficial chemoprevention strategy, 
which, however, has not been examined. Because, a marginal enhancement of this 
protein may be adequate for genomic protection, we studied alterations in MGMT 
activity and expression in human peripheral blood lymphocytes and cancer cell 
lines induced by water-soluble and alcohol-soluble constituents of several 
plants with established antioxidant and medicinal properties. Both the ethanolic 
and aqueous extracts from neem (Azadirachta indica), holy basil (Ocimum 
sanctum), winter cherry (Withania somnifera), and oregano (Origanum majorana) 
increased the levels of MGMT protein and its demethylation activity in a 
time-dependent manner with a maximum of 3-fold increase after 72-h treatment. 
The extracts from gooseberry (Emblica officinalis), common basil (Ocimum 
basilicum), and spearmint (Mentha viridis) were relatively less efficient in 
raising MGMT levels. Increased levels of MGMT mRNA accounted at least, in part, 
for the increased activity of the DNA repair protein. The herbal treatments also 
increased glutathione S-transferase-pi (GSTP1) expression, albeit to a lesser 
extent than MGMT. These data provide the first evidence for the upregulation of 
human MGMT by plant constituents and raise the possibility of rational dietary 
approaches for attenuating alkylation-induced carcinogenesis. Further, they 
reveal the putative antioxidant responsiveness of the MGMT gene in human cells.
