Curcumin: the Indian solid gold.

Aggarwal BB(1), Sundaram C, Malani N, Ichikawa H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Therapeutics, The University of Texas M.D. 
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. aggarwal@mdanderson.org

Turmeric, derived from the plant Curcuma longa, is a gold-colored spice commonly 
used in the Indian subcontinent, not only for health care but also for the 
preservation of food and as a yellow dye for textiles. Curcumin, which gives the 
yellow color to turmeric, was first isolated almost two centuries ago, and its 
structure as diferuloylmethane was determined in 1910. Since the time of 
Ayurveda (1900 Bc) numerous therapeutic activities have been assigned to 
turmeric for a wide variety of diseases and conditions, including those of the 
skin, pulmonary, and gastrointestinal systems, aches, pains, wounds, sprains, 
and liver disorders. Extensive research within the last half century has proven 
that most of these activities, once associated with turmeric, are due to 
curcumin. Curcumin has been shown to exhibit antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, 
antiviral, antibacterial, antifungal, and anticancer activities and thus has a 
potential against various malignant diseases, diabetes, allergies, arthritis, 
Alzheimer's disease, and other chronic illnesses. These effects are mediated 
through the regulation of various transcription factors, growth factors, 
inflammatory cytokines, protein kinases, and other enzymes. Curcumin exhibits 
activities similar to recently discovered tumor necrosis factor blockers (e.g., 
HUMIRA, REMICADE, and ENBREL), a vascular endothelial cell growth factor blocker 
(e.g., AVASTIN), human epidermal growth factor receptor blockers (e.g., ERBITUX, 
ERLOTINIB, and GEFTINIB), and a HER2 blocker (e.g., HERCEPTIN). Considering the 
recent scientific bandwagon that multitargeted therapy is better than 
monotargeted therapy for most diseases, curcumin can be considered an ideal 
"Spice for Life".
