In vitro and in vivo evaluation of the anticarcinogenic and cancer 
chemopreventive potential of a flavonoid-rich fraction from a traditional Indian 
herb Selaginella bryopteris.

Mishra PK(1), Raghuram GV, Bhargava A, Ahirwar A, Samarth R, Upadhyaya R, Jain 
SK, Pathak N.

Author information:
(1)Research Wing, Bhopal Memorial Hospital and Research Centre, Bhopal, India. 
pkm_8bh@yahoo.co.uk

Prevention of cancer through nutritional intervention has gained significant 
recognition in recent years. Evidence revealed from mechanistic investigations 
coupled with molecular epidemiology show an inverse association of dietary 
flavonoids intake with cancer risk. The chemopreventive and anticarcinogenic 
potential of Selaginella bryopteris, a traditional Indian herb referred to as 
'Sanjeevani' in the Ayurvedic system of medicine, was examined in the present 
study. Comprehensive in vitro and in vivo studies were conducted on the 
flavonoid-rich benzene fraction of the aqueous extract that demonstrated a 
significant cytoprotective activity. Biomarkers of chemoprevention such as 
proliferative index and status of cell-cycle regulatory proteins, antioxidant 
property, anti-inflammatory effect, reversal of stress-induced senescence and 
genoprotective effect were investigated in human and murine cell cultures. 
Chemopreventive potential was assessed in benzopyrene-induced lung 
carcinogenesis and 7,12-dimethyl benz(a)anthracene-mediated skin 
papillomagenesis test models. Inhibition of DNA fragmentation, unperturbed 
cell-cycle regulation, maintenance of intracellular antioxidant defence, 
anti-inflammatory activity, prevention of stress-induced senescence and 
genoprotective effects against methyl isocyanate carcinogenicity was observed. 
Medium-term anticarcinogenicity and two-stage skin papillomagenesis tests 
strongly substantiated our in vitro observations. Results from the present study 
provide evidence of anticarcinogenic and chemopreventive activities of S. 
bryopteris hitherto unreported and reaffirm the nutritional significance of 
flavonoids in cancer prevention.

