The effect of chilli ingestion on gastrointestinal mucosal proliferation and 
azoxymethane-induced cancer in the rat.

Kang JY(1), Alexander B, Barker F, Man WK, Williamson RC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Royal Postgraduate Medical School, London, United 
Kingdom.

Of the three main races of Singapore, Malays and Indians are less susceptible to 
gastric and colorectal carcinoma and peptic ulcer when compared with Chinese. 
Racial differences in dietary habits include a smaller amount of chilli consumed 
by the Chinese when compared with the other two races. Chilli may be expected to 
accelerate gastrointestinal transit and hence to inhibit colonic carcinogenesis, 
while its active ingredient capsaicin protects against experimental gastric 
mucosal injury. The effect of chilli consumption was studied in relation to: (i) 
gastrointestinal crypt cell production rate and nucleic acid content as indices 
of mucosal proliferation, which is related to the risk of development of 
gastrointestinal cancer and peptic ulcer; and (ii) azoxymethane-induced 
intestinal cancer. Sprague-Dawley rats (n = 102) received either standard 
powdered chow or chow supplemented with 100 or 200 mg of chilli powder daily for 
1, 18 or 24 weeks. Gastric, small-bowel and colonic crypt cell production rates 
were studied at all three time periods, while mucosal DNA, RNA and protein 
contents were measured at 1 and 24 weeks. While crypt cell production rates were 
unaffected by chilli ingestion, mucosal contents of nucleic acid and protein 
were mostly increased in chilli-fed animals compared to controls, especially in 
the colon at 24 weeks. A further 99 rats received subcutaneous injections of 
either azoxymethane 15 mg/kg/week x 6 or sterile water and were randomized to 
the same three dietary groups for 26 weeks. The number, size and location of 
benign and malignant duodenal and colonic tumours were unaffected by chilli 
intake.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)