Cell cycle effects and caspase-dependent and independent death of HL-60 and 
Jurkat cells treated with the inhibitor of NF-kappaB parthenolide.

Pozarowski P(1), Halicka DH, Darzynkiewicz Z.

Author information:
(1)Brander Cancer Research Institute, New York Medical College, Valhalla, New 
York, USA.

The sesquiterpene parthenolide (PRT) is an active component of Mexican-Indian 
medicinal plants and also of the common herb of European origin feverfew. PRT is 
considered to be a specific inhibitor of NF-kappaB. Human leukemic HL-60, 
Jurkat, and Jurkat IkappaBalphaM cells, the latter expressing a 
dominant-negative IkappaBalpha and thus having non-functional NF-kappaB, were 
treated with PRT and activation of caspases, plasma membrane integrity, DNA 
fragmentation, chromatin condensation (probed by DNA susceptibility to 
denaturation), and changes in cell morphology were determined. As a positive 
control for apoptosis cells were treated with topotecan (TPT) and H2O2. At 2-8 
microM concentration PRT induced transient cell arrest in G2 and M followed by 
apoptosis. A narrow range of PRT concentration (2-10 microM) spanned its 
cytostatic effect, induction of apoptosis and induction of necrosis. In fact, 
necrotic cells were often seen concurrently with apoptotic cells at the same PRT 
concentration. Atypical apoptosis was characterized by loss of plasma membrane 
integrity very shortly after caspases activation. In contrast, a prolonged phase 
of caspase activation with preserved integrity of plasma membrane was seen 
during apoptosis induced by TPT or H2O2. Necrosis induced by PRT was also 
atypical, characterized by rapid rupture of plasma membrane and no increase in 
DNA susceptibility to denaturation. Using Jurkat cells with inactive NF-kappaB 
we demonstrate that cell cycle arrest and the mode of cell death induced by PRT 
were not caused by inhibition of NF-kappaB. The data suggest that regardless of 
caspase activation PRT targets plasma membrane causing its destruction. A 
caution, therefore, should be exercised in interpreting data of the experiments 
in which PRT is used with the intention to specifically prevent activation of 
NF-kappaB.
