Alcohol, tobacco and paan use and understanding of oral cancer risk among Asian 
males in Leicester.

Vora AR(1), Yeoman CM, Hayter JP.

Author information:
(1)School of Clinical Dentistry, University of Sheffield.

OBJECTIVES: To determine use of alcohol, tobacco and paan among males from the 
various Asian communities in Leicester; and assess their knowledge and attitudes 
towards oral cancer risk factors and prevention. Also, to determine any 
differences regarding habits and attitudes between first and second generation 
Asians.
DESIGN: Volunteers completed a confidential, bilingual questionnaire regarding 
alcohol, tobacco and paan use and also knowledge about oral cancer risk factors 
and preventive measures.
SETTING: Participants were recruited from sources that included GPs' surgeries, 
sixth form colleges and places of worship.
SUBJECTS: Asian males, i.e. those of Indian, Pakistani, Bangladeshi or Sri 
Lankan origin; over the age of 16 years and resident in Leicester.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Quantitative figures were obtained from the 
questionnaires as to the frequency of alcohol, tobacco and paan use and 
responses regarding oral cancer knowledge, risk factors and preventive measures.
RESULTS: The principal Asian community groups in Leicester were Hindu, Sikh, 
Muslim and Jain. Significant differences were found in males from these groups 
with regards to habits and oral cancer awareness. Muslim males use tobacco and 
paan more than the other groups but avoid alcohol. Sikh males drink more alcohol 
(especially spirits) than the other groups but their use of tobacco and paan is 
low. Habits of Hindu and Jain males are variable. However, approximately 10% of 
both 1st and 2nd generation Hindu males combine all three habits of alcohol, 
tobacco and paan; and are thus considered to be at high risk of developing oral 
cancer. Seven percent of 1st generation Hindu males were found to chew paans 
containing tobacco which are strongly associated with oral cancer. More 2nd 
generation Jains drank alcohol than the 1st generation, and a greater proportion 
of Hindu, Sikh and Jain 2nd generation males drink spirits than their older 
counterparts. Knowledge of oral cancer risk factors and preventive measures were 
variable, the lowest level of knowledge being among the 1st generation Sikh 
group. Few volunteers realised the risk of alcohol drinking in the aetiology of 
oral cancer.
CONCLUSION: The 'Asian' community in Leicester is not homogeneous, but consists 
of distinct community groups; each with their own cultural beliefs, habits and 
attitudes. Knowledge of these differences can be used to provide appropriate 
health education programmes suitably targeted to reduce the use of the known 
risk factors for oral cancer.
