Co-overexpression of p53 and c-myc proteins linked with advanced stages of 
betel- and tobacco-related oral squamous cell carcinomas from eastern India.

Baral R(1), Patnaik S, Das BR.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Biology Division, Institute of Life Sciences, Sahid Nagar, 
Bhubaneswar, India.

Epidemiological evidence suggests that heavy consumption of betel quid and 
tobacco with areca nuts is the cause of high incidence of oral cancer in eastern 
part of Indian population, which is distinctly different from the etiology of 
oral squamous cell carcinomas (SCCs) in western countries. Here, expression of 
p53 and c-myc protein was studied in oral SCCs from this etiologically distinct 
population by immunohistochemistry. Out of 48 specimens of oral SCCs, 22 (45.8%) 
exhibited p53 positivity and 27 (56.3%) showed immunoreactivity with c-myc 
antibody. Considering the p53/c-myc expression pattern, either alone or in 
combination, the population was divided into four groups, i.e., both p53 and 
c-myc positive; p53 positive-c-myc negative; c-myc positive - p53 negative; and 
both p53 and c-myc negative. Tumours with both p53 and c-myc positivity were in 
advanced stages of the disease (poorly differentiated, tumour stage 3, nuclear 
grade III), whereas earliest stage of oral SCCs was detected in tumours with 
neither p53 nor c-myc immunoreactivity. Tumours of remaining two groups were 
generally restricted to early to moderate stages. These observations suggest 
that rapid progression of the betel- and tobacco-related oral SCCs may be 
associated with a simultaneous involvement of these two oncoproteins. The study 
also attempted to find out the relationship of p53/c-myc expression with 
spontaneous apoptosis. More apoptotic cells were found in c-myc positive but p53 
negative tumours. This preliminary observation requires further molecular 
investigation of the role of p53 and c-myc genes for the progression of this 
epidemiologically distinct oral carcinogenesis.
