Correlation between p53 gene mutations and circulating antibodies in betel- and 
tobacco-consuming North Indian population.

Ralhan R(1), Agarwal S, Nath N, Mathur M, Wasylyk B, Srivastava A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Ansari 
Nagar, 11029, New Delhi, India. rralham@medinst.ernet.in

Alterations in p53 tumour suppressor gene and its expression may be implicated 
in the pathogenesis of betel- and tobacco-related oral cancer. There is wide 
regional variation in betel- and tobacco-consuming habits in different parts of 
the Indian subcontinent. The purpose of this study was to determine the 
correlations between p53 gene mutations, protein accumulation and serum 
antibodies in oral precancer and cancer. We analysed 30 potentially malignant 
oral lesions (leukoplakia) and 30 oral squamous cell carcinomas (SCCs) from 
northern India because the betel quid-consuming habits are different from those 
prevalent in other regions of India. p53 mutations were analysed by polymerase 
chain reaction amplification of genomic DNA and direct sequencing, p53 protein 
accumulation by immunohistochemical analysis and circulating p53 antibodies by 
ELISA. p53 gene mutations, analysed within exons 5-9, were observed in five out 
of 30 (17%) potentially malignant oral lesions and seven out of 30 (23%) oral 
SCCs. All the mutations were base substitution mutations. Three missense and two 
nonsense mutations were observed in potentially malignant oral lesions, while 
six missense and one nonsense mutations were identified in oral SCCs. The 
probable hot spots for the mutations were identified at codons 126, 136 and 174, 
which have not been observed thus far. A good correlation was observed between 
p53 missense mutation, p53 antibodies and p53 protein accumulation in matched 
potentially malignant and malignant oral lesions. All the potentially malignant 
and cancerous lesions harbouring missense mutations showed accumulation of p53 
protein and the majority of these patients showed circulating p53 antibodies 
suggesting that serological detection of p53 antibodies may serve as a surrogate 
marker for p53 alterations in oral lesions.
