Overexpression of p53 protein in betel- and tobacco-related human oral dysplasia 
and squamous-cell carcinoma in India.

Kaur J(1), Srivastava A, Ralhan R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New 
Delhi.

The aetiological factors for oral cancer are not the same in India and in 
Western countries. Epidemiological studies have shown a correlation between high 
incidence of oral cancer and heavy consumption of betel and/or tobacco in the 
Indian population, while this study indicates an association with a genetic 
change. The p53 tumour-suppressor gene is the most commonly identified mutated 
gene in human malignancies. Expression of p53 protein was examined in 
premalignant and malignant oral lesions from Indian patients who were consumers 
of betel, areca nut and/or tobacco, using anti-p53 monoclonal antibodies PAb 
1801 and PAb 421. Cryosections from normal, premalignant or malignant oral 
mucosa were used for immunostaining and the observations were confirmed by 
immunoprecipitation. p53 protein was detected in 55% (15/27) premalignant oral 
lesions (leukoplakia). Strong p53-positive staining was detected in 75% (24/32) 
of oral squamous-cell carcinomas. Normal oral mucosa did not show positive p53 
staining (0/24). The detection of p53 protein in premalignant oral lesions 
suggests that p53 aberrations are an early event in the development of oral 
cancer in India. The high incidence of p53 positivity in leukoplakia may be due 
to differences in aetiological factors. p53 overexpression in premalignant oral 
lesions is important in view of the significantly earlier onset of leukoplakia 
in the Indian population compared to the development of oral malignancy, and may 
be helpful in identifying lesions that are more likely to progress to 
malignancy. The frequency of p53 protein overexpression was high in premalignant 
and malignant oral lesions of patients who were heavy consumers of betel, areca 
nut and tobacco.
