The antioxidant and antiproliferative activities of methanolic extracts from 
Njavara rice bran.

Rao AS(1), Reddy SG, Babu PP, Reddy AR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant Sciences, School of Life Sciences, University of 
Hyderabad, Hyderabad 500 046, India. arrsl@uohyd.ernet.in

BACKGROUND: Free radical-induced oxidative stress is the root cause for many 
human diseases. Naturally occurring antioxidant supplements from plants are 
vital to counter the oxidative damage in cells. The main objective of the 
present study was to characterize the antioxidant and antiproliferative 
potential of rice bran extracted from an important Indian rice variety, Njavara 
and to compare the same with two commercially available basmati rice varieties: 
Vasumathi, Yamini and a non medicinal variety, Jyothi.
METHODS: Methanolic extracts of rice bran from four varieties; Vasumathi, 
Yamini, Jyothi and Njavara were used to study their total phenolic and flavonoid 
contents, in vitro antioxidant activities including total antioxidant activity, 
scavenging of nitric oxide and 1,1-Diphenyl-2-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH) radical, 
reducing power and cytotoxic activity in C6 glioma cells. Correlation 
coefficient and regression analysis were done by using Sigmastat version 3.1 and 
Stata statistical package respectively.
RESULTS: Rice bran methanolic extract from Njavara showed the highest 
antioxidant and cell cytotoxic properties compared to the other three rice 
varieties. IC50 values for scavenging DPPH and nitric oxide were in the range of 
30.85-87.72 microg/ml and 52.25-107.18 microg/ml respectively. Total antioxidant 
activity and reducing power were increased with increasing amounts of the 
extract. Total phenolic and flavonoid contents were in the range of 3.2-12.4 mg 
gallic acid-equivalent (GAE)/g bran and 1.68-8.5 mg quercetin-equivalent (QEE)/g 
bran respectively. IC50 values of cytotoxic assay (MTT assay) were 17.53-57.78 
microg/ml. Correlation coefficient and regression analysis of phenolic content 
with DPPH and NO scavenging, MTT (-[4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl]-2,5-diphenyl 
tetrazolium bromide) assay, total antioxidant assay and reducing power showed a 
highly significant correlation coefficient values (96-99%) and regression values 
(91-98%).
CONCLUSION: The results of the present study show that the crude methanolic 
extract from Njavara rice bran contains significantly high polyphenolic 
compounds with superior antioxidant activity as evidenced by scavenging of free 
radicals including DPPH and NO. Njavara extracts also showed highest reducing 
power activity, anti-proliferative property in C6 glioma cells. In conclusion, 
it is conceivable that the Njavara rice variety could be exploited as one of the 
potential sources for plant--based pharmaceutical products.
