Withaferin A induces apoptosis by activating p38 mitogen-activated protein 
kinase signaling cascade in leukemic cells of lymphoid and myeloid origin 
through mitochondrial death cascade.

Mandal C(1), Dutta A, Mallick A, Chandra S, Misra L, Sangwan RS, Mandal C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious diseases and Immunology, Indian Institute of 
Chemical Biology, 4 Raja S.C. Mullick Road, Kolkata 700 032, India.

Withaferin A (WA) is present abundantly in Withania somnifera, a well-known 
Indian medicinal plant. Here we demonstrate how WA exhibits a strong 
growth-inhibitory effect on several human leukemic cell lines and on primary 
cells from patients with lymphoblastic and myeloid leukemia in a dose-dependent 
manner, showing no toxicity on normal human lymphocytes and primitive 
hematopoietic progenitor cells. WA-mediated decrease in cell viability was 
observed through apoptosis as demonstrated by externalization of 
phosphatidylserine, a time-dependent increase in Bax/Bcl-2 ratio; loss of 
mitochondrial transmembrane potential, cytochrome c release, caspases 9 and 3 
activation; and accumulation of cells in sub-G0 region based on DNA 
fragmentation. A search for the downstream pathway further reveals that 
WA-induced apoptosis was mediated by an increase in phosphorylated p38MAPK 
expression, which further activated downstream signaling by phosphorylating 
ATF-2 and HSP27 in leukemic cells. The RNA interference of p38MAPK protected 
these cells from WA-induced apoptosis. The RNAi knockdown of p38MAPK inhibited 
active phosphorylation of p38MAPK, Bax expression, activation of caspase 3 and 
increase in Annexin V positivity. Altogether, these findings suggest that 
p38MAPK in leukemic cells promotes WA-induced apoptosis. WA caused increased 
levels of Bax in response to MAPK signaling, which resulted in the initiation of 
mitochondrial death cascade, and therefore it holds promise as a new, 
alternative, inexpensive chemotherapeutic agent for the treatment of patients 
with leukemia of both lymphoid and myeloid origin.
