Factors affecting commencement and cessation of betel quid chewing behaviour in 
Malaysian adults.

Ghani WM(1), Razak IA, Yang YH, Talib NA, Ikeda N, Axell T, Gupta PC, Handa Y, 
Abdullah N, Zain RB.

Author information:
(1)Oral Cancer Research & Coordinating Centre, Faculty of Dentistry, University 
of Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.

BACKGROUND: Betel quid chewing is a common habit widely practiced in Southern 
Asian populations. However, variations are seen in the content of a betel quid 
across the different countries. Factors associated with commencement and 
cessation of this habit has been numerously studied. Unfortunately, data on 
Malaysian population is non-existent. This study aims to determine the factors 
associated with the inception and also cessation of betel quid chewing behaviour 
among Malaysian adults.
METHOD: This study is part of a nationwide survey on oral mucosal lesions 
carried out among 11,697 adults in all fourteen states in Malaysia. The 
questionnaire included sociodemographic information and details on betel quid 
chewing habit such as duration, type and frequency. The Kaplan-Meier estimates 
were calculated and plotted to compare the rates for the commencement and 
cessation of betel quid chewing behaviour. Cox proportional hazard regression 
models were used to calculate the hazard rate ratios for factors related to 
commencement or cessation of this habit.
RESULTS: Of the total subjects, 8.2% were found to be betel quid chewers. This 
habit was more prevalent among females and, in terms of ethnicity, among the 
Indians and the Indigenous people of Sabah and Sarawak. Cessation of this habit 
was more commonly seen among males and the Chinese. Females were found to be 
significantly more likely to start (p < 0.0001) and less likely to stop the quid 
chewing habit. Females, those over 40 years old, Indians and a history of 
smoking was found to significantly increase the likelihood of developing a quid 
chewing habit (p < 0.0001). However, those who had stopped smoking were found to 
be significantly more likely to promote stopping the habit (p = 0.0064). 
Cessation was also more likely to be seen among those who chewed less than 5 
quids per day (p < 0.05) and less likely to be seen among those who included 
areca nut and tobacco in their quid (p < 0.0001).
CONCLUSION: Factors that influence the development and cessation of this 
behaviour are gender, age, ethnicity, and also history of smoking habit while 
frequency and type of quid chewed are important factors for cessation of this 
habit.
