Exploration of the frontiers of tradomedical practices: basis for development of 
alternative medical healthcare services in developing countries.

Osujih M(1).

Author information:
(1)Rivers State College of Education, Port Harcourt, Nigeria.

The study is a brief exploration of the functions and roles of the traditional 
healers in the total health care delivery system as a basis for tapping the 
salient features of this age old art: for the purpose of refining, and 
establishing it as an alternative medical health-care service. The investigation 
is considered relevant particularly in the developing countries where, in 
addition to the dearth of orthodox medical services, institutions and personnel, 
it is relatively cheaper, socio-culturally accessible and acceptable. Refining 
and developing some aspects of the traditional healers' services will serve the 
interest of the health consumers whose main concern is with service and not the 
source. Furthermore, it is hoped that the study will stimulate purposeful 
discussions on the need for an unbiased examination of the materials, methods 
and techniques of the traditional healers including, eventually, compiling a 
native pharmacopoeia. A more comprehensive account of the traditional healers 
contributions to the battle against diseases and maintenance of health and well 
being is envisaged.

PIP: In traditional healing, practitioners use barks, leaves, nuts, fruit juices 
and roots, and parts of domestic animals. They practice their craft mostly in 
Africa, Asia, and other Third World countries, and they are variously called 
juju priests, diviners, herbalists, and witch doctors. Cases of achievements in 
their contributions to preventive and curative health have been documented. In 
Nigeria, clients regularly patronize both orthodox and traditional medical 
practitioners. Their remedies include healing the bite of the very poisonous 
carpet viper, chronic bronchitis, peptic ulcer, and heart problems, as well as 
performing uvulectomy and tonsillectomy. Quinine, the cure for malaria, was 
originally the ritual medicine of the Incas of Peru. It was confirmed that 
Azadirachta Indica (Meliaceae), the neem tree, used against malaria in Nigeria, 
India, and Asia, had a potent antiplasmodial activity. The plant Streblus asper, 
Linn (Shakhotoha Siora) is well known in Indian Ayurvedic medicine to treat 
fever, filariasis, dysentery, and diarrhea. The alkaloids derived from the 
Madagascan periwinkle Catharanthus roseus (Apocynaceae), used in a West Indian 
remedy for diabetes mellitus, have antitumor activity. The drug Maytensine, 
obtained from Mytenus ovatus Loes (Celastraceae), was found to be a powerful 
antitumor agent in animals. Tea made from the leaves of Osyris wightiana 
stimulated the flow of breast milk and also acted as a labor-inducing agent. 
Saponaria officinalis and Enterobbium cyclocarpum are both used in Egypt and 
Tanzania as spermicide contraceptives. A 1985 survey in Cross River State, 
Nigeria, demonstrated that 165 (61%) of respondents went to traditional healers 
for treatment. Part of their continued popularity is the person-centered 
approach that is virtually lacking in orthodox hospitals, although this 
humanistic approach to therapy is gradually gaining inroads into Western medical 
education. The services of both kinds of medicine could be harmonized by 
open-minded appraisal, identification of positive aspects, and acceptance of 
their complimentary nature.