Hypolipidaemic and antioxidant effects of fruits of Musa AAA (Chenkadali) in 
alloxan induced diabetic rats.

Kaimal S(1), Sujatha KS, George S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary Biochemistry, Faculty of Veterinary and Animal 
Sciences, Mannuthy, Thrissur 680 651, India.

Hypolipidaemic and antioxidant effects of ethanol extract of mature green fruits 
of Musa AAA (Chenkadali) was evaluated in alloxan induced diabetic rats. The 
effect of extract at two doses, 500 mg/kg body weight and 1000 mg/kg body weight 
was analysed and compared with a standard drug, glibenclamide. Rats administered 
with alloxan showed significantly increased levels of serum triacylglycerol, 
total cholesterol and alanine amino transferase (ALT) activity. Lipid peroxides 
increased significantly while reduced glutathione (GSH) decreased considerably 
in liver and pancreas. Oral administration of the ethanol extract of fruits of 
Musa AAA (Chenkadali) significantly decreased the levels of serum 
triacylglycerol, cholesterol and ALT activity. Significant decrease was also 
observed in the level of lipid peroxides while GSH content increased 
substantially in liver and pancreas. The effect was dose independent and rats 
treated with 500 mg/kg body weight showed comparable levels of serum 
triacylglycerol, cholesterol, ALT activity and liver lipid peroxides to that of 
normal control and glibenclamide treated groups. Although, there was no 
significant difference, treatment with 500 mg/kg body weight of the extract 
showed a higher content of GSH and lower level of lipid peroxides in pancreas 
compared with glibenclamide. Histopathological examination of pancreas and liver 
revealed regeneration of islet cells and hepatocytes respectively, which 
correlate with the biochemical findings. The present study shows that ethanol 
extract of mature green fruits of Musa AAA (Chenkadali) has antioxidant and 
hypolipidaemic properties and may be used for treating diabetes mellitus.
