Therapeutic uses of Ocimum sanctum Linn (Tulsi) with a note on eugenol and its 
pharmacological actions: a short review.

Prakash P(1), Gupta N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Seema Dental College & Hospital, Barrage Road, 
Rishikesh, Dehradoon - 249 203, Uttranchal.

The medicinal plants are widely used by the traditional medical practitioners 
for curing various diseases in their day to day practice. In traditional systems 
of medicine, different parts (leaves, stem, flower, root, seeds and even whole 
plant) of Ocimum sanctum Linn (known as Tulsi in Hindi), a small herb seen 
throughout India, have been recommended for the treatment of bronchitis, 
bronchial asthma, malaria, diarrhea, dysentery, skin diseases, arthritis, 
painful eye diseases, chronic fever, insect bite etc. The Ocimum sanctum L. has 
also been suggested to possess antifertility, anticancer, antidiabetic, 
antifungal, antimicrobial, hepatoprotective, cardioprotective, antiemetic, 
antispasmodic, analgesic, adaptogenic and diaphoretic actions. Eugenol 
(1-hydroxy-2-methoxy-4-allylbenzene), the active constituent present in Ocimum 
sanctum L., has been found to be largely responsible for the therapeutic 
potentials of Tulsi. Although because of its great therapeutic potentials and 
wide occurrence in India the practitioners of traditional systems of medicine 
have been using Ocimum sanctum L. for curing various ailments, a rational 
approach to this traditional medical practice with modern system of medicine is, 
however, not much available. In order to establish the therapeutic uses of 
Ocimum sanctum L. in modern medicine, in last few decades several Indian 
scientists and researchers have studied the pharmacological effects of steam 
distilled, petroleum ether and benzene extracts of various parts of Tulsi plant 
and eugenol on immune system, reproductive system, central nervous system, 
cardiovascular system, gastric system, urinary system and blood biochemistry and 
have described the therapeutic significance of Tulsi in management of various 
ailments. These pharmacological studies have established a scientific basis for 
therapeutic uses of this plant.