Quantitative ethnobotany of traditional Siddha medical practitioners from 
Radhapuram taluk of Tirunelveli District, Tamil Nadu, India.

Chellappandian M(1), Mutheeswaran S, Pandikumar P, Duraipandiyan V, Ignacimuthu 
S.

Author information:
(1)Division of Ethnopharmacology, Entomology Research Institute, Loyola College, 
Nungambakkam, Chennai 600 034, India.

ETHNOBOTANICAL RELEVANCE: The aim of the present study was to document the 
knowledge of traditional Siddha medical practitioners from Radhapuram taluk of 
Tirunelveli district in Tamil Nadu, India, and to quantitatively analyze the 
data to identify some useful leads for further studies.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Successive free listing was the method adopted for the 
interview. In this study, 84 traditional Siddha medical practitioners were 
included and their knowledge on medicinal plants was gathered. The data were 
assessed with the help of two indices viz., Informant Consensus Factor (F(ic)) 
and Informant Agreement on Remedies (IAR).
RESULTS: The present survey is in accordance with some of the aspects of our 
previous surveys. Regarding the demography of the informants, it exhibited 
unevenness in male-female ratio and majority of the informants were poorly 
educated. Practicing this system of medicine as part time job by majority of the 
informants might indicate the reduced social status of this medicinal system. 
The present study had recorded the usage of 217 species which were used to 
prepare 448 formulations, which in turn yielded 812 use reports. Conversion of 
use reports had yielded a total of 625 claims and 84.16% of the claims were 
'singletons'. The illness category 'adjuvants' holds a high F(ic) value. Among 
the other illness categories, kapha ailments and dermatological ailments have a 
high percentage of use-reports. Ailments of blood, jaundice and fever were the 
other illness categories with high F(ic) values. Some of the claims viz., Mukia 
madarasepatana (kapha ailments), Mollugo nudicaulis (febrifuge), Indigofera 
asphalathoides (dermatological ailments), Aerva lanata (urinary ailments), 
Abutilon indicum (hemorrhoids) and Hybanthus enneaspermus (aphrodisiac), which 
have relatively high consensus can be taken up for further biomedical studies, 
since no substantial studies have been conducted on them.
CONCLUSION: One of the major aims of National Rural Health Mission is to 
implement traditional Indian system of medicines into the main stream. In such 
scenario, scientific validation of community-based local health traditions 
becomes necessary for their rational implementation. Through this study we have 
highlighted some claims which are at high use in the study area but having 
little scientific support. Studies on such claims will provide scientific base 
which in turn will be useful to improve the health of indigenous people.
