Laboratory evaluation of Indian medicinal plants as repellents against malaria, 
dengue, and filariasis vector mosquitoes.

Govindarajan M(1), Sivakumar R.

Author information:
(1)Unit of Vector Control, Phytochemistry and Nanotechnology, Department of 
Zoology, Annamalai University, Annamalainagar, Tamilnadu, 608 002, India, 
drgovindzoo@yahoo.com.

Mosquito-borne diseases have an economic impact, including loss in commercial 
and labor outputs, particularly in countries with tropical and subtropical 
climates; however, no part of the world is free from vector-borne diseases. 
Mosquitoes are the carriers of severe and well-known illnesses such as malaria, 
arboviral encephalitis, dengue fever, chikungunya fever, West Nile virus, and 
yellow fever. These diseases produce significant morbidity and mortality in 
humans and livestock around the world. In view of the recently increased 
interest in developing plant origin insecticides as an alternative to chemical 
insecticides, in the present study, the repellent activity of crude hexane, 
ethyl acetate, benzene, chloroform, and methanol extracts of leaf of Erythrina 
indica and root of Asparagus racemosus were assayed for their repellency against 
three important vector mosquitoes, viz., Anopheles stephensi, Aedes aegypti, and 
Culex quinquefasciatus. The crude extract was applied on a membrane used for 
membrane feeding of unfed mosquitoes in a 1-ft cage. About 50 unfed 3-4-day-old 
laboratory-reared pathogen-free strains of A. stephensi, A. aegypti, and C. 
quinquefasciatus were introduced in a 1-ft cage fitted with a membrane with 
blood for feeding with temperature maintained at 37 °C through circulating water 
bath maintained at 40-45 °C. Three concentrations (1.0, 2.0, and 5.0 mg/cm(2)) 
of the crude extracts were evaluated. Repellents in E. indica afforded longer 
protection time against A. stephensi, A. aegypti, and C. quinquefasciatus than 
those in A. racemosus at 5.0 mg/cm(2) concentration, and the mean complete 
protection time ranged from 120 to 210 min with the different extracts tested. 
In this observation, these two plant crude extracts gave protection against 
mosquito bites; also, the repellent activity is dependent on the strength of the 
plant extracts. These results suggest that the leaf extract of E. indica and 
root extract of A. racemosus have the potential to be used as an ideal 
eco-friendly approach for the control of mosquitoes. This is the first report on 
the mosquito repellent activity of the reported A. racemosus and E. indica 
plants.