Neem (Azadirachta indica; Meliaceae) is widely 
known for its cold pressed seed oil, mainly used as insecticide, but also for 
cosmetic, medicinal and agricultural uses. The seed oil is widely employed in 
the Indian subcontinent, and the leaves seem to have a lower relevance, but the 
ethnobotanical information of Bali (Indonesia) considers the utilisation of 
leaves for medicinal properties.
AIM OF THE STUDY: We report ethnopharmacological information about current uses 
of neem, in particular of the leaves, besides the insecticidal one, we discuss 
on the historical background of their uses.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Ethnobotanical data were collected using both literature 
and scientific references and semi-structured interviews with 50 informants 
(ages ranged between 14 and 76 years old) through the snowball method in 
thirteen aga (indigenous Balinese) villages, following Ethic code procedures. 
The informants were asked to specify: which part of the plant was used, and how 
that plant part was used. Plant specimens were collected, identified and made 
into herbarium voucher. In consideration of the high variability and complex 
chemical constituent of neem, a HPTLC analysis of neem leaves coming from both 
the Indonesian island of Bali and the Indian subcontinent was carried out.
RESULTS: The data on the medical use of traditional preparations from leaves of 
neem display a wide spectrum of applications. In the Indian subcontinent, neem 
leaves are used to treat dental and gastrointestinal disorders, malaria fevers, 
skin diseases, and as insects repellent, while the Balinese used neem leaves as 
a diuretic and for diabetes, headache, heartburn, and stimulating the appetite. 
Differences in utilisation cannot be related to chemical differences and other 
constituents besides limonoids must be investigated and related to the 
multipurpose activity of neem.
CONCLUSION: This study revealed that neem leaves are believed to treat diabetes 
in both Balinese and Indian communities. Limonoids can not be considered the 
only responsible of digestive properties. Further research would be the 
validation of this report by enzymatic tests and the identification of active 
constituents.