The Himalayan region is the treasure house of natural wealth, particularly of 
medicinal and aromatic plants. These plants are used by the Indian traditional 
healers for the past many centuries to treat various ailments such as skin 
disorders, asthma, diabetes, snake bite, fever, pain, eye diseases, diarrhoea, 
indigestion, jaundice, burn, wound, liver disorder, CNS disorders and urinary 
tract infection. The indigenous traditional knowledge of medicinal plants and 
therapies of various local communities has been lost due to changes in 
traditional culture and the introduction of modern technologies. Therefore, it 
is essential to explore the traditional knowledge of the indigenous medicinal 
plants mainly in such areas where there is a severe threat to natural vegetation 
owing to human inhabitation. The present study aimed to explore the medicinal 
plants of Chakrata region (Jaunsar-Bawar Hills), Uttarakhand, India used in the 
folk medicine for the management of diabetes by Jaunsari Tribe. In a 
comprehensive field survey, the information about the medicinal plants have been 
mainly collected from the traditional healers and other elderly people belong to 
the tribal community. All the information about the medicinal plants of the 
study area was documented in a field book. Various tools have been used to 
collect the samples for identification purpose and the authentication of the 
plants was done with the help of taxonomists. The literature on these plants was 
also searched from online (PubMed and Scopus) as well as from some textbooks and 
Ayurvedic classical texts. The present survey-based work described a total of 54 
plants belonging to 47 genera and 30 families used in the traditional medicine 
for the management of diabetes in Chakrata region. The information gathered from 
the local community revealed that the plants are effective in diabetes and one 
can use most of them without consulting a practitioner or traditional healer. 
The literature revealed that most of the surveyed plants are already used in the 
preparation of various antidiabetic formulations such as Chandraprabha vati, 
Nishamalaki chunra, Amritamehari churna and Nisakathakadi kashayam along with 
various patent drugs which are frequently prescribed by the Ayurvedic 
practitioners in India. The present study explored the traditional as well as 
scientific knowledge on the antidiabetic plants used by the tribal community. 
The documented information on these plants can be further used by the scientific 
community to develop new drugs/formulations with the help of modern techniques.