Inhibition of intestinal glucose absorption by anti-diabetic medicinal plants 
derived from the James Bay Cree traditional pharmacopeia.

Nistor Baldea LA(1), Martineau LC, Benhaddou-Andaloussi A, Arnason JT, Lévy É, 
Haddad PS.

Author information:
(1)Natural Health Products and Metabolic Diseases Laboratory, Department of 
Pharmacology, Université de Montréal, Quebec, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Type II diabetes and obesity are major health problems worldwide and 
aboriginal peoples are particularly at risk. To address this problem in Canadian 
native populations who find modern pharmaceuticals culturally inappropriate, our 
team is testing the traditional pharmacopeia of the James Bay Cree for 
anti-diabetic and anti-obesity activities. More specifically, the aim of the 
present study was to define the effects of traditional plants on intestinal 
glucose absorption, an under-appreciated anti-hyperglycaemic and anti-obesity 
activity.
METHODS: Crude ethanol extracts of 17 Boreal forest medicinal plants were tested 
in vitro using the Caco-2 human enterocytic cell line and in vivo using an oral 
glucose tolerance test.
RESULTS: Thirteen of seventeen extracts were observed to significantly inhibit 
uptake when administered simultaneously with (3)H-deoxyglucose. Inhibition was 
dose-dependent and, in a few cases, even surpassed that induced by a combination 
of the positive controls. To validate these effects in vivo, four plant extracts 
were administered by intragastric gavage at 250 mg/kg to normal rats 
simultaneously with a 3g/kg bolus of glucose. This resulted in a decrease in 
peak glycaemia by approximately 40% for two of them. Similarly, only 2 extracts 
reduced glucose transport after long term incubation and this could be related 
to reductions in the expression of SGLT-1 or GLUT-2 proteins.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings indicate that competitive inhibition of intestinal 
glucose uptake can be achieved by crude extracts of medicinal plants. Such 
extracts could be taken with meals to control postprandial glycaemia and reduce 
caloric intake in high risk populations that are positively inclined towards 
traditional medicine.