In vitro and in vivo antidiabetic effect of extracts of Melia azedarach, 
Zanthoxylum alatum, and Tanacetum nubigenum.

Khan MF(1), Rawat AK(2), Khatoon S(3), Hussain MK(4), Mishra A(2), Negi DS(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Era's Lucknow Medical College & Hospital, Era 
University, Lucknow, India.
(2)Biochemistry Division, CSIR-Central Drug Research Institute, CSIR, Lucknow, 
India.
(3)Department of Botany, D. N. (P.G.) College, Meerut, India.
(4)Department of Chemistry Govt. Raza Post Graduate College, Rampur, India.
(5)Department of Chemistry, HNB Garhwal University, Srinagar, India.

BACKGROUND: To investigate the antidiabetic effect of Himalayan Medicinal plants 
from India viz. Melia azedarach (Family: Meliaceae), Zanthoxylum alatum (Family: 
Rutaceae), Tanacetum nubigenum (Family: Asteraceae) using in-vitro as well as 
in-vivo approaches.
METHODS: Their effects were examined on stimulation of glucose uptake by C2C12 
cultured cell line, inhibitory effect on human recombinant Protein tyrosine 
phosphatase-1B (PTP-1B) and followed by the hypoglycaemic activity of extracts 
in Streptozotocin (STZ) induced diabetic rats.
RESULTS: All prepared extracts had been found to enrich with polyphenolic, 
flavonoids, terpenoids, anthraquinones and saponins type of compounds. n-Butanol 
fraction of Zanthoxylum alatum showed maximum PTP-1B inhibition (61.9%) whereas 
ethanol extract of Tanacetum nubigenum showed strong stimulation of glucose 
uptake (+61.2%) in C2Cl2 myotubes. In STZ induced Sprague-Dawley rats, 
significant decrease in blood glucose level was observed in ethanol extract of 
Melia azaderach treated group as 14.8% (p < 0.01) whereas in the ethanol extract 
of Tanacetum nubigenum treated group, it was observed as 15.5% (p < 0.01) 
compare to metformin which showed 26.8% (p < 0.01) lowering of blood glucose in 
the same time duration of 5 h study.
CONCLUSION: This study demonstrated that these plants have a significant 
therapeutic value in type-2-diabetes mellitus and related complications thus 
supporting their traditional uses in Indian traditional system of medicine.