Population change of Trillium govanianum (Melanthiaceae) amid altered indigenous 
harvesting practices in the Indian Himalayas.

Chauhan HK(1), Bisht AK(2), Bhatt ID(3), Bhatt A(4), Gallacher D(5), Santo A(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Botany, D.S.B. Campus, Kumaun University, Nainital, 263001, 
India; G.B. Pant National Institute of Himalayan Environment & Sustainable 
Development, Kosi- Katarmal, Almora 263643, India.
(2)Department of Botany, D.S.B. Campus, Kumaun University, Nainital, 263001, 
India.
(3)G.B. Pant National Institute of Himalayan Environment & Sustainable 
Development, Kosi- Katarmal, Almora 263643, India.
(4)Kuwait Institute for Scientific Research, P. O. Box 24885, Safat 13109, 
Kuwait.
(5)Department of Interdisciplinary Studies, Zayed University, P.O. Box 19282, Al 
Ruwayyah, Dubai, UAE.
(6)University of Cagliari, 09123 Cagliari, Italy. Electronic address: 
andreasanto85@gmail.com.

ETHNOBOTANICAL RELEVANCE: Trillium govanianum Wall. ex D. Don (Melanthiaceae) is 
valued as a traditional medicinal herb in the Himalayan region. Applications 
include treatment of cancer, hypertension, neurasthenia, giddiness, arthritis, 
dysentery, inflammation, sepsis and reproductive disorders. Its range is highly 
specific, and limited to cold, shaded and moist habitats at 2400-3500 m a.s.l. 
Rhizomes are gathered from wild populations for trade, and this has recently 
emerged as a significant source of income among indigenous people of the Indian 
Himalayan region.
AIM: To assess the impact of changing rhizome prices on T. govanianum in the 
Indian Himalayan region by observing the status of existing populations and 
assessing the typical methods used for gathering and trade of rhizomes.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Ecological attributes were assessed in 17 sites from 
Tirthan Valley (Himachal Pradesh), Munsiyari and Tunghnath (Uttarakhand). 
Socio-economic attributes assessed through communal focus groups and interviews 
with 579 medicinal plants gatherers and 19 traders, using semi-structured open 
ended questionnaires.
RESULTS: Population decline was highest in Munsiyari, followed by Tirthan Valley 
and Tunghnath, indicating that the species may become locally extinct in some 
areas. Methods used for gathering did not consider regeneration.
CONCLUSION: Gathering of T. govanianum from wild populations is unselective and 
unmanaged, raising the potential threat of local extinctions. Sustainable 
utilization and effective conservation is needed to protect the species and 
maintain community incomes. A status of 'threatened' is justified for the 
species in the Indian Himalayan region, due to its slow life cycle, specific 
habitat requirement, low population density, and commercial value.