Rapid Screening of Forskolin-Type Diterpenoids of Blumea aromatica DC Using 
Ultra-High-Performance Liquid Chromatography Tandem Quadrupole Time-of-Flight 
Mass Spectrometry Based on the Mass Defect Filtering Approach.

He L(1), Zhang Z(2), Yao C(1), Miao J(1), Yan B(1), Wu L(1), Pan L(1), Song 
Z(3), Wei S(4).

Author information:
(1)National Engineering Institute for the Research and Development of Endangered 
Medicinal Resources in Southwest China, Guangxi Botanical Garden of Medicinal 
Plants, Nanning 530023, China.
(2)Institute of Qinghai-Tibetan Plateau, Southwest University for Nationalities, 
Chengdu 610041, Sichuan Province, China.
(3)National Engineering Institute for the Research and Development of Endangered 
Medicinal Resources in Southwest China, Guangxi Botanical Garden of Medicinal 
Plants, Nanning 530023, China. songzj430@aliyun.com.
(4)National Engineering Institute for the Research and Development of Endangered 
Medicinal Resources in Southwest China, Guangxi Botanical Garden of Medicinal 
Plants, Nanning 530023, China. weishugen2@163.com.

The discovery of new active compounds of natural products tends to be 
increasingly more challenging due to chemical complexity and unpredictable 
matrices. Forskolin is an active natural labdane-type diterpenoid ingredient 
widely used worldwide for the treatment of glaucoma, heart failure, 
hypertension, diabetes, and asthma, and is expected to be a promising 
anticancer, anti-inflammation, and anti-HIV agent. In recent years, demand for 
forskolin in the medicine market has increased dramatically. However, natural 
forskolin originates exclusively from traditional Indian herb medicine Coleus 
forskohlii (Willd.) Briq. In a previous study, we isolated a series of 
diterpenoids including an 8,13-epoxy-14ene labdane carbon skeleton from Blumea 
aromatica DC. In order to identify alternative plant resources, a novel and 
effective strategy was proposed for the screening of potential forskolin-type 
diterpenoids (FSKD) compounds obtained from B. aromatica, using the mass defect 
filtering (MDF) strategy via ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography tandem 
quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometry (UHPLC-QTOF/MS) approach. Within a 
narrow, well-defined mass defect range, the strategy developed could 
significantly improve the detection efficiency of selected FSKD compounds by 
filtering out certain major or moderate interference compounds. Additionally, 
the MS/MS cleavage behavior and the characteristic diagnostic ions of the FSKD 
compounds were proposed to be used in aiding structural identification of the 
filtration compounds. As a result, a total of 38 FSKD of B. aromatica were 
filtered out and tentatively identified. To the best of our knowledge, it was 
the first time that these forskolin-type diterpenoids were identified in B. 
aromatica, which significantly expands our understanding of the chemical 
constituents of Blumea species, and allows B. aromatica to be used as a 
potential alternative plant resource that contains these forskolin-type active 
compounds. The strategy proposed was proven efficient and reliable for the 
discovery of novel compounds of herbal extracts.
