Antioxidant, hepatoprotective and cytotoxic effects of icetexanes isolated from 
stem-bark of Premna tomentosa.

V G M N(1), Atmakur H(2), Katragadda SB(2), Devabakthuni B(3), Kota A(3), S 
CK(3), Kuncha M(3), M V P S VV(3), Kulkarni P(3), Janaswamy MR(2), Sistla R(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, National Institute of 
Pharmaceutical Education and Research, Hyderabad 500037, India.
(2)Division of Natural Product Chemistry, CSIR-Indian Institute of Chemical 
Technology, Hyderabad 500007, India.
(3)Division of Medicinal Chemistry and Pharmacology, CSIR-Indian Institute of 
Chemical Technology, Hyderabad 500007, India.
(4)Division of Medicinal Chemistry and Pharmacology, CSIR-Indian Institute of 
Chemical Technology, Hyderabad 500007, India. Electronic address: 
sistla@iict.res.in.

The study investigates the antioxidant, hepatoprotective and antiproliferative 
effects of novel icetexane diterpenoids (ice 1-4) isolated from hexane extract 
of stem bark of Premna tomentosa. A549, HT-29, MCF-7, MDA-MB-231, A431 cells 
were used to assess the antiproliferative activity by MTT assay. Cell death 
induced by apoptosis was determined by morphological assessment studies using 
acridine orange/ethidium bromide staining (dual staining), mitochondrial 
potential measurement by JC-1 staining, and cell cycle analysis by propidium 
iodide staining method by Muse cell analyser. Anti oxidant activity was 
investigated by in vitro assays such as DPPH, nitric oxide and superoxide 
scavenging activities. Hepatoprotective activity was determined in vitro with 
HepG2 cells and in vivo by tBHP induced hepatic damage mice model. Based on the 
in vitro cytotoxic assays and morphological assessment studies using 
fluorescence microscopic study (acridine orange and ethidium bromide double 
staining) and mitochondrial potential measurements, it was found that ice 2 and 
3 possess good antiproliferative effect via mitochondrial mediated apoptosis in 
human lung and breast cancer cells. Results of in vitro antioxidant studies 
demonstrated that ice-4 has showed good antioxidant activity. The restoration of 
serum levels of SGOT, SGPT and ALKP, liver GSH status and reduction or 
inhibition of lipid peroxidation in liver of tBHP intoxicated mice after 
administration of ice-4 at dose of 250mg/kg indicated its potential use for 
hepatoprotective activity.