Pterospermum acerifolium (L.) wild bark extract induces anticarcinogenic effect 
in human cancer cells through mitochondrial-mediated ROS generation.

Tripathi SK(1), Biswal BK(2).

Author information:
(1)Cancer and Stem Cell Laboratory, Department of Life Science, National 
Institute of Technology, Rourkela, Sundargarh, Odisha, 769008, India.
(2)Cancer and Stem Cell Laboratory, Department of Life Science, National 
Institute of Technology, Rourkela, Sundargarh, Odisha, 769008, India. 
biswalb@nitrkl.ac.in.

Plants have many medicinal properties including anticancer activity due to the 
presence of several secondary metabolites. Current cancer treatment policies are 
not much effective because of side effects and resistance development. 
Therefore, the discovery of new phytotherapeutics with no or fewer side effects 
is highly needed. Pterospermum acerifolium (L.) wild, an angiosperm has a broad 
application in traditional Indian medicinal system including cancer treatment. 
Despite, there is no study available on the cytotoxic and apoptotic effect of P. 
acerifolium in human cancer cells. Exploring the medicinal properties of P. 
acerifolium plant by its traditional use will be helpful towards developing 
novel cancer therapeutics. Hence, we decided to demonstrate the 
anti-carcinogenic property of P. acerifolium ethanolic bark extract against lung 
(A549) and pancreatic (PANC-1) cancer cells. The cytotoxicity was demonstrated 
by MTT assay, morphological changes, and scratch invasion assay. Flow cytometry, 
fluorescence staining techniques, and cell cycle analysis were confirmed the 
apoptotic property of P. acerifolium plant. The cell viability assay revealed 
that P. acerifolium ethanolic bark extract significantly reduced the viability 
of both A549 and PANC-1 cells. Moreover, PANC-1 cells showed more sensitivity 
towards P. acerifolium ethanolic bark extract than A549 at higher 
concentrations. Clear visualization of changes such as cytoplasmic condensation, 
cellular morphology, cell shrinkage, and augmented number of dead cells in both 
the cancer cells was observed after treatment. Scratch and invasion assay showed 
that cell migration and invasion rate of both the cancer cells were 
significantly reduced. Fluorescence microscopic studies using acridine 
orange/ethidium bromide and DAPI (4', 6-diamidino-2-phenylindole) staining 
showed early and late apoptotic symptoms after treatment with bark extract. 
Rhodamine-123 and DCFH-DA staining analysis by fluorescence and flow cytometry 
showed that bark extract depolarized the mitochondria membrane potential and 
induced reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation. Cell cycle analysis through 
flow cytometry using propidium iodide stain showed that P. acerifolium bark 
extract arrested A549 and PANC-1 cells in sub-G1 phase stated early apoptosis. 
These findings collectively point to the fact that P. acerifolium bark extract 
induced cell cytotoxicity in lung and pancreatic cancer cells by modulating 
mitochondrial-mediated ROS generation, and cell cycle checkpoints.