1. J Ethnopharmacol. 2019 Apr 24;234:245-289. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2019.01.012. Epub 
2019 Jan 15.

Medicinal plants brought by Indian indentured immigrants: A comparative review 
of ethnopharmacological uses between Mauritius and India.

Mahomoodally MF, Protab K, Aumeeruddy MZ.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Mauritius is famous for its floricultural 
diversity and traditions practiced across the island by various ethnic groups. 
During the British rule in the 1835s, Indian indentured labourers migrated to 
Mauritius and played a very important role in shaping the Mauritian culture. 
They brought along their high heritage of traditional knowledge of certain 
medicinal herbs and spices. Nonetheless, there has been no comparative study to 
investigate whether these past traditional knowledge are still preserved in 
Mauritius and India.
AIM OF THE STUDY: To document and compare the traditional uses of medicinal 
herbs and spices brought by Indian indentured labourers with their current uses 
in Mauritius and India, and to review pharmacological studies of such plants.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Locally published textbooks, research dissertations, and 
relevant records from the 'Mauritiana' section of the University of Mauritius 
library were scrutinised for possible early records of such herbs and spices 
brought by Indian indentured immigrants. Field trips and site visits to 
Mauritius Herbarium and The National Folk Museum were conducted to gather data 
on their traditional uses as practiced by the Indian indentured immigrants. A 
literature search was performed to gather the current ethnomedicinal uses of 
these plants in Mauritius and India using key databases such as ScienceDirect 
and PubMed, as well as thesis from local university website. Pharmacological 
studies on these plants were also reviewed in an attempt to compare the 
ethnomedicinal uses against reported ailments.
RESULTS: Indian labourers brought 18 medicinal plants for medicinal purposes as 
documented at the folk museum of Indian Immigration. Piper betle L., Azadirachta 
indica A. Juss., and Curcuma longa L. were common plants used by Indian 
indentured immigrants against a wide range of ailments. Data obtained from 
recent ethnomedicinal surveys revealed that A. indica and C. longa were the most 
traditionally used plants in India, while in Mauritius, C. longa was the most 
popular plant followed by Allium sativum L. and Ocimum tenuiflorum L. It was 
also found that all these plants are currently being used against a wide range 
of diseases in both countries. In addition, several studies have highlighted the 
pharmacological properties such as analgesic, anti-inflammatory, anti-microbial, 
anti-pyretic, and anti-diabetic for some plants.
CONCLUSION: This investigation can be considered as a first attempt to document 
and compare traditional knowledge of medicinal plants brought by Indian 
immigrants. We observed that some of these knowledge are preserved and still 
practiced in Mauritius. It is anticipated that this study will revive the 
interest in safeguarding and promoting the ancestral knowledge on the uses of 
such plants.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jep.2019.01.012
PMID: 30658182 [Indexed for MEDLINE]