Visceral organ involvement is infrequent in oral submucous fibrosis (OSF).

Rajendra R(1), George B, Sivakaran S, Narendranathan N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Oral Pathology and Microbiology, Govt. Dental College, 
Department of Cardiology, SCTIMST, and Department of Gastroenterology, Medical 
College, Trivandrum, India. Inforec@md2.vsnl.net.in

Associated visceral organ involvement evidence by systemic fibrosis has not been 
explored in oral submucous fibrosis (OSF). The investigations in this aspect 
were limited to loco-regional sites of naso/oropharynx and oesophagus. The study 
of whether the oral fibrosis is part of a systemic spectrum of disease involving 
multiple organs is an interesting pursuit. With this intention the patients 
diagnosed on clinical and histological grounds for OSF were concurrently tested 
by biophysical means for the presence of endomyocardial fibrosis (EMF), 
pancreatic (PF) and retroperitoneal fibrosis (RPF), which are endemic to the 
area studied. Twenty-five (n = 25) cases of OSF who visited the Department of 
Oral pathology & Microbiology. Govt. Dental College, Trivandrum, India for 
symptomatic relief of their illness comprised the study group. Ten (n = 10) age 
and sex matched healthy volunteers comprised the control. All the subjects have 
had undergone cardiologic and gastrointestinal investigations to rule out the 
possibility of concurrent EMF and PF. The patients were all of Indian ethnic 
extraction and mostly (> 90%) were from low socio economic classes. The mean age 
of the patients was 54.16 +/- 14.6 years, including 18 females and 7 males (F:M 
= 2.57:1). The severity of fibrosis was unrelated to the age of patients (P > 
0.05). All the patients were chewers of areca quid (12%)/tobacco (88%). In 
addition to quid chewing 3/25 (12%) patients smoked 'bidi' and 6/25 (24%) 
consumed home brewed liquor (arrack/toddy) which contain about 40-50% ethanol. 
Statistically no relationship was observed between the clinical stages of OSF 
and severity of epithelial dysplasia in this study (P > 0.05). Out of the 25 
patients, 5 (20%) showed sclerotic aortic value which may be an age related 
finding. Also 7 (28%) patients were found to be hypertensive and interstitial 
lung disease was present in 2 (8%). The possibility of EMF in one female patient 
who showed thickened RV apical endocardium was ruled out by cardiac 
catheterisation. Thus none of the patients showed evidence of endomyocardial 
fibrosis. The pancreas was found to be hyperchoic in 8(32 1/4) by ultra 
sonography. Liver was found to be hyperchoic in 6 (24%). Fat stain in stool 
samples was found to be positive in 13(58%). The hyperchogenecity of pancreas 
may be due to alcoholism or an underlying endocrine pancreatic insufficiency 
like diabetes and not due to pancreatic fibrosis. The positivity of fat stain 
could be due to fatty liver/alcoholism. Thus the study fails to reveal any 
evidence of pancreatic fibrosis in the group. The lack of any evidence of an 
associated visceral organ fibrosis in OSF made it prudent to believe that this 
is a loco-regional disease, initiated by local factors and propagated under 
their influence without systemic involvement.