Both experimental and clinical studies suggest that oxidative stress 
plays a major role in the pathogenesis of both types of diabetes mellitus. This 
oxidative stress leads to ß-cell destruction by apoptosis. Hence exploring 
agents modulating oxidative stress is an effective strategy in the treatment of 
both Type I and Type II diabetes. Plants are a major source of anti-oxidants and 
exert protective effects against oxidative stress in biological systems. 
Phyllanthus emblica, Curcuma longa and Tinospora cordifolia are three such 
plants widely used in Ayurveda for their anti-hyperglycemic activity. 
Additionally their anti-oxidant properties have been scientifically validated in 
various experimental in vitro and in vivo models. Hence the present in vitro 
study was planned to assess whether the anti-hyperglycemic effects of the 
hydro-alcoholic extracts of Phyllanthus emblica (Pe) and Curcuma longa (Cl) and 
aqueous extract of Tinospora cordifolia (Tc) are mediated through their 
antioxidant and/or anti-apoptotic property in a streptozotocin induced stress 
model.
METHODS: RINm5F cell line was used as a model of pancreatic ß-cells against 
stress induced by streptozotocin (2 mM). Non-toxic concentrations of the plant 
extracts were identified using MTT assay. Lipid peroxidation through MDA 
release, modulation of apoptosis and insulin release were the variables measured 
to assess streptozotocin induced damage and protection afforded by the plant 
extracts.
RESULTS: All 3 plants extracts significantly inhibited MDA release from RIN 
cells indicating protective effect against STZ induced oxidative damage. They 
also exhibited a dose dependent anti-apoptotic effect as seen by a decrease in 
the sub G0 population in response to STZ. None of the plant extracts affected  
insulin secretion from the cells to a great extent.
CONCLUSION: The present study thus demonstrated that the protective effect of 
the selected medicinal plants against oxidative stress induced by STZ in vitro, 
which was exerted through their anti-oxidant and anti-apoptotic actions.
