There are more than 3000 officially documented 
plants in the Indian subcontinent that hold great medicinal potential. One such 
under-explored plant is an evergreen tropical tree Neolamarckia cadamba (Roxb.) 
Bosser (Rubiaceae). It is widely distributed in tropical and subtropical regions 
of the world and has therapeutic potential against many diseases such as 
diabetes, anaemia, stomatitis, leprosy, cancer and infectious diseases. 
Neolamarckia cadamba has historical existence in India and it is mentioned in 
mythical stories. There are several reports on medicinal values of root, bark 
and leaves of N. cadamba; but the literature on its fruits is scanty. Therefore, 
the present review aims to provide updated comprehensive information on the 
phytochemistry and pharmacological properties of different parts of N. cadamba 
tree with special reference to its fruit, in order to open new perspectives for 
future food and pharmacological research.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A literature search was performed on N. cadamba using 
ethnobotanical textbooks, published articles in peer-reviewed journals, 
unpublished materials, government survey reports and scientific databases such 
as Pubmed, Scopus, Web of Science, Science Direct, Google Scholar and other web 
search engines (Google, Yahoo). The Plant List, International Plant Name Index 
and Kew Botanical Garden Plant name databases were used to validate the 
scientific names.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: Neolamarckia cadamba is one of the economically 
important trees, which is being exploited for paper, pulp and wood industry. In 
folk medicine, various parts of N. cadamba are used in the treatment of various 
ailments such as fever, uterine complaints, blood diseases, skin diseases, 
tumour, anaemia, eye inflammation and diarrhoea. Other reported uses of N. 
cadamba include antihepatotoxic, antimalarial, analgesic, anti-inflammatory, 
antipyretic, diuretic and laxative. Various phytochemicals such as cadambine and 
its derivatives (dihydrocadambine and isodihydrocadambine) and indole alkaloids 
(Neolamarckines) were isolated from the leaves; whereas the presence of quinovic 
acid derivatives have been reported in the bark of N. cadamba.
CONCLUSION: The present review compiles information on an ethnopharmacologically 
useful plant N. cadamba. Bioactive compounds responsible for its various 
medicinal properties and their effects at the molecular level need to be 
investigated in more detail. Furthermore, the detailed study of toxicity and 
pharmacological properties of extracts as well as molecules in N. cadamba is 
required to confirm the ethnomedicinal claims of N. cadamba for food and 
pharmaceutical applications.