
A RP-HPLC-DAD-APCI/MSD method for the characterisation of medicinal Ericaceae 
used by the Eeyou Istchee Cree First Nations.

Saleem A(1), Harris CS, Asim M, Cuerrier A, Martineau L, Haddad PS, Arnason JT.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for the Analysis of Natural and Synthetic Environmental Toxins 
(LANSET), Centre for Research in Biotechnology and Biopharmaceuticals, 
Department of Biology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario K1N6N5, Canada.

INTRODUCTION: Ericaceae medicinal plants are traditionally used by the Eeyou 
Istchee Cree and other northern peoples of North America to treat type 2 
diabetic symptoms. Because of the importance of phenolics as potential cures for 
degenerative diseases including type 2 diabetes, an analytical method was 
developed to detect them in the leaf extracts of 14 Ericaceae plants.
OBJECTIVE: To develop an optimised method which is applicable to a relatively 
large number of Ericaceae plants using their leaf extracts. For this purpose 
phenolics with a wide range of polarity, including a glucosylated benzoquinone, 
two phenolic acids, three flavanols, a flavanone, a flavone and five flavonols, 
were included in this study.
METHODOLOGY: Characterisation of phytochemicals in extracts was undertaken by 
automated matching to the UV spectra to those of an in house library of plant 
secondary metabolites and the authentication of their identity was achieved by 
reversed phase-high-performance chromatography-diode array detection-atmospheric 
pressure chemical ionisation/mass selective detection.
RESULTS: Twenty-six phenolics were characterised within 26 min of 
chromatographic separation in 80% ethanol extracts of 14 Ericaceae plants. The 
calibration curves were linear within 0.5-880 microg/g dry mass of the plant 
with regression values better than 0.995. The limits of detection ranged from 
0.3 for microg/mL for (+)-catechin to 2.6 microg/mL for chlorogenic acid. This 
is a first study dealing with relatively large number of Ericaceae extracts and 
is applicable to other plants of same family.
