Extraction Optimization for Phenolic- and Withanolide-Rich Fractions from 
Withania somnifera Roots: Identification and Quantification of Withaferin A, 
12-Deoxywithastromonolide, and Withanolide A in Plant Materials and Marketed 
Formulations Using a Reversed-Phase HPLC-Photodiode Array Detection Method.

Kumar S(1), Singh R(1), Gajbhiye N, Dhanani T(1).

Author information:
(1)Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR), Directorate of Medicinal and 
Aromatic Plants Research, Boriavi, Anand, Gujarat, India 387310.

Background: Both the roots and leaves of Withania somnifera are products of 
commerce. They contain active compounds of therapeutic value and mostly 
different withanolides. Several pharmacological activities of W. somnifera have 
links to one or more withanolides. The presence of phenolic compounds in 
extracts could play a vital role in the reduction of blood glucose levels in 
diabetic subjects. Objective: The present study was carried out for the 
selection of a solvent to prepare extracts rich in phenolics, withaferin A (WA), 
12-deoxywithastromonolide (12WD), and withanolide A (WDA). A simple, rapid HPLC 
method was also developed for the identification and quantification of WA, 12WD, 
and WDA. Methods: The extraction efficiency of aqueous alcoholic solvents 
including hexane, chloroform, ethyl acetate, and methanol were compared for 
three selected withanolides and total phenolic content. The contents of WA, 
12WD, and WDA and total phenolics were determined in the extracts. The quality 
of nine formulations containing W. sominfera were also compared in terms of the 
content of WA, 12WD, and WDA and total phenolics. Results: The maximum extract 
yield and the total withanolide and phenolic content were obtained from aqueous 
alcoholic compositions at 50:50 (v/v), 70:30 (v/v), and 100:0 (v/v), 
respectively. In the case of organic solvents, chloroform and ethyl acetate 
yielded the highest concentrations of phenolics and three withanolides, 
respectively. The total phenolic content in formulations was in the range of 
1.84-3.13%, and total withanolide content showed wide variability. Conclusions: 
The outcome of the present investigation could be utilized for the selection of 
extraction solvents to prepare W. somnifera-enriched extracts and their quality 
monitoring by using the developed and validated HPLC-Photodiode array detection 
method. Highlights: A process for preparation of phenolics and withanolides 
(withaferin A, 12-deoxywithastramonolide and withanolide A) enriched extracts of 
Withania somnifera. Simple and rapid HPLC method was also developed and 
validated as per the ICH guidelines for identification and quantification of 
three major withanolides. The developed HPLC method was applied to analyze the 
quality of extracts and marketed herbal products (mono, as well as poly 
constituents). Optimized extraction process could be utilized for upscaling 
process development in preparation of enriched extracts from Withania somnifera, 
crop improvement, bio-prospection studies and quality control.
