Ethnomedicinal plants traditionally used in health care practices by inhabitants 
of Western Himalaya.

Malik ZA(1), Bhat JA(2), Ballabha R(1), Bussmann RW(3), Bhatt AB(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Botany and Microbiology, HNB Garhwal Central University, 
Srinagar, Uttarakhand, India.
(2)Department of Forestry, College of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry, Fiji 
National University, Koronivia, PO Box 1544, (Nausori) Republic of Fiji Islands. 
Electronic address: jahan191@gmail.com.
(3)William L. Brown Center, Missouri Botanical Garden, PO Box 299, St. Louis, MO 
63166-0299, USA.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Inspite of tremendous advances made in 
allopathic medicine, herbal practice still plays an important role in management 
and curing various ailments in remote and rural areas of India. However, 
traditional knowledge on the use of medicinal plants is eroding day by day and 
there is a need to document such knowledge, before it is lost forever. The aim 
of the present study was to document the indigenous and traditional knowledge of 
medicinal plants used by local inhabitants in and around Kedarnath Wildlife 
Sanctuary of Indian Himalaya for the advancement of biomedical research and 
development.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The intensive field survey was carried out at three 
different altitudes of Kedarnath Wildlife Sanctuary (KWLS) and its adjoining 
areas. The inhabitants were interviewed about the local name of plants having 
ethno-medicinal values, plant parts used, mode of processing/application and 
preparation and dosage through discussions and semi structured questionnaires.
RESULTS: A total of 97 medicinal plant species belonging to 52 families and 83 
genera were reported for curing various ailments like fever, cough, cold, 
digestive disorders, constipation, menstrual disorders etc. Out of 97 plant 
species reported, 21 are rare or threatened. Literature review revealed that 11 
out of the 97 plant species are reported with new therapeutic uses. The most 
frequently utilized plant part was the root/rhizome (33%) followed by leaf 
(27%). In some cases whole plant was utilized. A few medicinal plants had some 
veterinary uses also.
CONCLUSION: The study provides comprehensive information about the eroding 
indigenous and traditional knowledge of medicinal plants used by local 
inhabitants in a part of Western Himalaya, India. The identification of the 
active ingredients of the plants used by the local people may provide some 
useful leads for the development of new drugs and such new approaches of 
traditional knowledge regarding medicinal plants and laboratory analysis might 
help pharmaceutical industry in new chapters for the wellbeing of mankind.