A cross-cultural analysis of Jammu, Kashmir and Ladakh (India) medicinal plant 
use.

Gairola S(1), Sharma J(2), Bedi YS(3).

Author information:
(1)Plant Biotechnology Division, CSIR-Indian Institute of Integrative Medicine, 
Canal Road, Jammu 180001, India; Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research, 
Anusandhan Bhawan, 2 Rafi Marg, New Delhi 110001, India. Electronic address: 
sumeetgairola@iiim.ac.in.
(2)Department of Botany, University of Jammu, Jammu 180006, Jammu & Kashmir, 
India.
(3)Plant Biotechnology Division, CSIR-Indian Institute of Integrative Medicine, 
Canal Road, Jammu 180001, India; Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research, 
Anusandhan Bhawan, 2 Rafi Marg, New Delhi 110001, India.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Jammu & Kashmir (J&K) is a predominantly 
Himalayan state in the north-western part of India. It has three geographically 
distinct divisions viz., Jammu, Kashmir and Ladakh, which are immensely rich in 
their biological and cultural diversity. Medicinal plants are an important 
element of indigenous medical system of the region. The main goal of the present 
article is to examine the use of ethnomedicinal plants in three divisions of J&K 
and to discuss cross-cultural consensus on the use of medicinal plants in these 
divisions. The article also discusses the gaps in the current state of knowledge 
on ethnomedicinal plants of the region and gives recommendations for the future 
studies.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Scientific literature on ethnomedicinal field studies 
conducted in J&K state of India available in the journals, edited books and 
other scientific databases viz., CAB international, DOAJ, Google Scholar, 
PubMed, Science direct, SciFinder, Scopus and Web of Science were searched. Only 
field based ethnomedicinal surveys from last four decades up to December 2013 
reporting first hand information on the medicinal plants used to treat human 
health related ailments by indigenous communities of J&K were included in this 
study. Venn diagram was used to analyze the cross-cultural consensus on the use 
of ethnomedicinal plants in the three divisions of J&K.
RESULTS: A total of 948 plant taxa (923 angiosperms, 12 gymnosperms and 13 
pteridophytes) belonging to 129 families, 509 genera, 937 species and 11 
varieties have so far been reported to have a traditional medicinal use by 
indigenous communities of J&K. Asteraceae (60 genera, 132 spp.) was the most 
frequently used family followed by Fabaceae (32 genera, 50 spp.) and Lamiaceae 
(27 genera, 55 spp.). 514, 415 and 397 medicinal plants were used in Jammu, 
Kashmir and Ladakh divisions, respectively. Sixty eight plant taxa were used in 
all the three divisions, whereas 95 plants were common between Ladakh and Jammu, 
127 plants between Ladakh and Kashmir, and 216 plants between Jammu and Kashmir. 
Maximum numbers of plant taxa were used for treating dermatological problems 
(321), followed by cold, cough and throat related ailments (250), fever (224), 
joint and muscle related ailments (215), gastrointestinal disorders (210), 
urogenital ailments (199), respiratory ailments (151), body pain (135) and 
gynecological disorders (127).
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first study from the J&K state, which has examined the 
medicinal plant use in three divisions of J&K and discussed the promising 
medicinal plant species with cross-cultural consensus. The analysis of the data 
suggested that while large numbers of plants are used medicinally in each 
division, there is a low interregional consensus and high variation between 
medicinal plants used in these divisions, which is due to both cultural 
divergence as well as biological distinctness. The issues related to current 
status of knowledge on medicinal plants used by indigenous communities of J&K 
have been discussed and some recommendations have been made for future studies 
on medicinal plants in J&K region.
