An ethnopharmacological survey of the traditional medicine utilized in the 
community of Porvenir, Bajo Paraguá Indian Reservation, Bolivia.

Hajdu Z(1), Hohmann J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacognosy, University of Szeged, Szeged, Hungary. 
zsanett.hajdu@pharm.u-szeged.hu

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Porvenir is a semi-isolated Indian community in 
the Bajo Paraguá Indian Reservation in Bolivian Amazon, one of the two 
communities of people from the Guarasug'we indigenous nation now close to 
extinction. The aim of our study was the collection of data on the traditional 
medicine utilized in the community, and to identify new subjects for further 
investigation by comparison of the folk-medicinal use with the available 
scientific literature data.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Field work was conducted for 5 months, which included 
participant observation, semi-structured interviews with 16 individuals, and the 
collection of voucher specimens for botanical identification. The knowledge of 
the inhabitants relating to medicinal plants was analysed by means of the 
modified method of Gentry and Phillips (1993a,b), which assesses the frequency 
and the variety of use of plants. Scientific data were gathered on selected 
species, and the correlations of the traditional uses of the herbs with 
scientific evidence were assessed.
RESULTS: The lifestyle and beliefs in Porvenir, botanical data on the plants 
used, the frequency and variety of medicinal use, diseases that occur and their 
possible treatment, and methods of plant application are discussed in detail. 
145 plant species were registered with 451 recorded uses. The majority of the 
plants were utilized to treat gastrointestinal complaints (60 species), followed 
by diseases of the central nervous system, pain and fever (37 species), diseases 
of the genitourinary tract (35 species), dermatological disorders (34 species) 
and diseases of the respiratory system (32 species). One fifth of the species 
are also applied in traditional medicine in other areas of Bolivia or in other 
countries. The majority of the 145 species used in the community have not been 
extensively investigated from phytochemical and pharmacological aspects. There 
are no data in the scientific literature on one fifth of the species.
CONCLUSIONS: The medicine applied in Porvenir and the contemporary knowledge of 
the people interviewed concerning plants reflect the local traditions and their 
changes very well, clearly demonstrating the influence exerted by conventional 
medicine, and how the ancestral knowledge is progressively being forgotten. The 
present ethnopharmacological survey indicates that 24 species that are 
frequently and consistently used in the community of Porvenir are perspective 
for further research, as their chemistry and pharmacology have not been 
published to date.
