Piper umbellatum L.: a comparative cross-cultural analysis of its medicinal uses 
and an ethnopharmacological evaluation.

Roersch CM(1).

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Medicina Dominicana, PO Box 160, Santo Domingo, Dominican 
Republic. croersch@imd-medicina-dominicana.org

AIM OF THE STUDY: This review assesses the botany, traditional medicinal uses, 
phytochemistry, pharmacology and toxicology of P. umbellatum.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Information on P. umbellatum was gathered via the 
internet (using Scirus, Google Scholar, CAB-Abstracts, MedlinePlus, Embase, 
Scielo, and Web of Science) and libraries. Additionally, previously unpublished 
work on the traditional uses of P. umbellatum from our National Study of the 
Medicinal Plants of the Dominican Republic has been included.
RESULTS: Piper umbellatum is a Neotropical plant species widely distributed in 
Mexico, Central America, South America and the West Indian Islands. It has also 
been introduced to Africa and South-East Asia. Traditional uses for this plant 
are recorded in 24 countries in three continents, America, Africa and Asia for a 
wide range of ailments such as kidney, women diseases, diarrhea, skin 
affections, burns, rheumatism, malaria, intestinal parasites, inflammation and 
fever. We have analyzed the cross-cultural agreement among traditional uses in 
different countries and found a high degree of consensus for the indications 
kidney/diuretic, stomachache and wounds. Phytochemical studies of P. umbellatum 
have demonstrated the presence of terpenes (mainly found in the essential oil), 
alkaloids, flavonoids, sterols and other classes of secondary metabolites. The 
extracts and pure compounds derived from P. umbellatum show a wide spectrum of 
pharmacological activities including antibacterial, anti-inflammatory, 
analgesic, antioxidant, cytotoxic, antimalarial, antileishmanial, and 
antitrypanosomal activity. A first commercial product is in development, based 
on the plant's protective characteristics against UV irradiation.
CONCLUSIONS: The interesting biological activities of P. umbellatum need further 
research in in vivo experiments and clinical studies. The outcome of these 
investigations will determine the possible development of drugs from P. 
umbellatum.
